Foreword by Seismic Stan
========================

EVE Online: The Greatest Story Still Being Told
-----------------------------------------------

Science fiction literature has brought forth many mind-bending and
society-changing stories. From the classic novels of Jules Verne, H.G.
Wells and Aldous Huxley to the grand visions of Arthur C. Clarke, Robert
Heinlein and Philip K. Dick. Entire universes were conjured in our minds
by Asimov's Foundation series and Frank Herbert's Dune saga.

Cinema was quick to embrace the opportunity to portray the future of man
with Fritz Lang's Metropolis and eventually went on to give us the ever
growing extended universes of Lucas' Star Wars and Roddenberry's Star
Trek along with many others, both original works and adaptions of
previously written stories.

Rich futuristic civilisations have sprung forth from other sources too;
Games Workshop's dystopian Warhammer 40,000 universe and FASA
Corporation's feudal BattleTech worlds to name just two. Comics have
given us everything from Dan Dare to Judge Dredd and in recent years
digital entertainment has stepped into the arena with enduring original
storytelling like Half Life and Mass Effect.

But the future of storytelling is changing and EVE Online stands on the
frontier.

When Science-Fiction and Science-Fact Collide
---------------------------------------------

Every story mentioned above, no matter how engaging and wonderful, has
one thing in common: They were all written to be enjoyed by the
individual reader, viewer or player (or in the case of tabletop games, a
small group). EVE Online is different.

EVE Online's universe of New Eden is an epic story told on an
unprecedented scale, enacted and recorded by and for its thousands of
participants. The freeform universe engulfs the player as soon as a
character is created, fusing him into the story by simply being present
in a single-sharded science-fiction universe.

Everyone Plays a Role
---------------------

Even those participants who choose to shun the lore are still woven into
the tapestry as they select their race and bloodline, starship piloting
skills and then head off into the player-populated organisation of their
choice. Every player becomes the citizen of a galaxy seething with
politics and treachery, violence and opportunity.

The lore of EVE Online is not purely a resource for hardcore
roleplayers, it's there to be passively enjoyed by everyone with even a
passing interest in epic science fiction concepts. The themes colour the
environment in which the metagamers plot, it provides character to the
engines of mass destruction flown in huge invasion fleets and it
flavours the tactical equipment options made by every pilot.

In fact, now our entertainment is so immersive, with participants so
involved in adrenaline-pumping ship-to-ship combat, our bodies can't
differentiate between a fictional spaceship environment and a primordial
threat that triggers a fight-or-flight response. Likewise with pleasure
-- we get our dopamine hits from the digital stimuli of our pixellated
victories. Those players who furiously claim that they are not
"roleplayers" would be right in a sense; whether they are an e-sports
combat pilot, a stoic fleet commander or the "King of Space", they
aren't playing a role, they're living it.

No Wizard's Hat Required
------------------------

Yet the depth of fiction available for those who also choose a
lore-driven path of immersion is immense. With a backstory that has
grown organically over the last decade, the epic interplay of warring
civilisations in a universe of amoral, technologically-enhanced humans
can be overwhelming for the newcomer. But fear not, if your interest has
been piqued and you'd like to know how to dip your toe in the pond of
EVE lore -- or perhaps even go for a paddle -- help is at hand. I am
proud to present renowned EVE content-explorer and lorehound Mark726's
[EVE Lore Survival
Guide](http://freebooted.blogspot.com/p/fiction.html).

I approached Mark with the idea of an "EVE Lore for Dummies"-type
concept, knowing his knowledge and writing style would make him the
perfect author for such a project. What I expected was two or three
articles providing a quick insight. What I got was that and much more;
20,000 words of light, well-researched explanation that could be
presented in short, digestible chunks. I have given it pride of place on
my [Freebooted](http://freebooted.blogspot.com/) blog, but I think it
deserves to evolve into something more. I suspect Mark was hoping I'd
stop asking him stupid questions once he'd written it, but now I have a
host of new stupid questions and after reading it, I'm sure you will
too.

The Greatest Story Not Yet Told
-------------------------------

As EVE Online continues to grow and its capsuleers live the story as it
unfolds, we can only hope that the content developers at CCP have the
vision to continue to push the narrative envelope, creating content that
will ensnare and inspire.

H.G. Wells had only the written word to inspire millions and by simply
adding audio he managed to [troll a
nation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_War_of_the_Worlds_(radio_drama)).
Just think what is possible with a state-of-the-art server cluster, a
cast and crew of hundreds of thousands and a universe as deep and
stunning as New Eden.

Go tell Asimov, the future is happening. We're living it.

Join us...

An Introduction
===============

Hi everyone. I'm Mark726. You might know me from [EVE
Travel](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/), a blog dedicated to exploring
and explaining the various landmarks (spacemarks?) in New Eden, to aid
anyone looking to sightsee around the Cluster. Seismic Stan approached
me a while ago to ask if I was interested in writing an "EVE Lore for
Rookies" blogpost. Well, unfortunately, what originally started out as
"a blogpost" quickly mutated into this, for lack of a better term,
monstrosity.

I had originally hoped that I would be able to cover the major points in
one blog post. Indeed, in starting this Guide, Seismic Stan had
mentioned to me that people were looking for a "cohesive stream of lore"
to follow the story of EVE. After thinking about this for a while, I
came to a realization: just as in real life, there IS no cohesive stream
of lore. Rather, there are many smaller, interwoven threads of stories
that come together to create a whole. I can't explain the background of
the Minmatar without giving background on the Amarr. I can't talk about
the Jove without explaining the EVE Gate. I can't even talk about the
history of interstel ar travel without mentioning and explaining, I kid
you not, at least three major other related EVE plot points. The story
of EVE is as interwoven as it is vast.

Still, I'm not one to turn down a chalenge. This guide, available here
and on [Freebooted](http://freebooted.blogspot.co.uk/p/fiction.html), is
an attempt to give a broad-ish overview of the history and lore of EVE
(a note to you professional RPers: I'd like to think that I hit the
major points in this primer, though I know I by no means hit them all.
If I left something out, it was (hopefully) an intentional decision on
my part, though feel free to argue it with me as necessary. If I got
something wrong, please let me know). Parts of the guide will be adapted
from my own blog entries, other parts will come from the so-called
"prime fiction" (direct from CCP lore, either in the form of
[Chronicles](http://community.eveonline.com/background/potw/), the
occasional book, the newly released Eve: Source, or the fantastic
[fiction portal](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Portal:EVE_Fiction)
found on the EVE wiki), and others from what must be considered
secondary sources (I would be remiss if I did not mention the fantastic
[The Hitchhiker's Guide to New
Eden](http://dl.eve-files.com/media/corp/Ken/The_Hitchhikers_Guide_to_New_Eden_v0.91.pdf)
by Kenreikko Valitonen). For anyone looking for more information on any
of these subjects, these will be your best places to start.

The guide will be roughly organized into five parts. In this first part,
I'll detail the deep history of New Eden, dating back practically to our
current day IRL (In Real Life), including the so-called Lost
Civilizations. The next part will look at the history of the five
empires: how they came to be, why they were created, etc, as well as the
development of CONCORD (this part is a doozy of a subject in and of
itself). Part Three (for those more interested in the yarr side of
things) will be looking at the development of the various pirate and
other smaller organizations. The fourth part will look at some of the
technology in New Eden, including the key developments of interstellar
travel, cloning, and interstellar communications, while the last section
will examine some miscel aneous items that don't quite fit anywhere
else.

So, let's get started, shall we?

In the Beginning
----------------

Let's start off with some very basic information. EVE Online takes place
(as of the posting of this blog) in the year 23,350 AD, or YC 114 (brief
sidenote: I'll return to the YC concept later on for timekeeping in the
section on miscellanea; suffice it for now to say that YC 0 corresponds
to the year 23236 AD in game terms, and that the year 2014 corresponds
to YC 116 in game.

The gameworld stretches over approximately 100 light-years, encompassing
approximately 5,000 known star systems collectively in a cluster of
stars we call New Eden (this number jumps to almost 7,500 if we include
wormhole space systems). We are completely cut off from Earth. Indeed,
it's not entirely clear that Earth even exists anymore, or if there are
any other humans out there in the universe. In terms of lore, New Eden
scientists are not even sure if a mythical place called
"[Earth](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Earth)" ever existed, though
most people seem to agree that all humans have a common starting point,
even if we aren't quite clear on where that might be. We, as capsuleers,
fly throughout the stars, literally connected to our ships through
cybernetic implants and direct neural links to our ships' computers,
which makes them an extension of ourselves. Through the wonders of
cloning technology, our consciousnesses can be sent to a new body at the
moment of our body's death, meaning that we are, for all intents and
purposes, immortal.

A brief note before I move on. At times throughout these posts, I'll
make a reference to something but preface it saying that the information
isn't known in game. That's one of the things that many role players
focus on in this game: trying to solve the mysteries of New Eden. There
are quite a few things that we, out of game, know about the game
universe that the general public in New Eden doesn't know. When role
playing, its important to keep these things separate, since half the fun
of role playing for many is trying to solve these mysteries through in
game means. If you bring up this OOC knowledge, RPers will generally
politely remind you that these things may not be known. I'll do my best
to set off pretty explicitly that certain information isn't known in
game or by the general public.

For those of you who are interested in RPing, most of this next
paragraph is probably going to have to be considered off-limits to your
character (for that matter, anything prior to the soon-to-be-mentioned
Dark Ages should as a whole be considered mostly offlimits). Scientists
and researchers in the game simply know almost nothing about the early
years of the New Eden cluster, much less anything that took place before
the collapse of the EVE Gate collapsed. For those of you who don't care
and/or want to know anyway, feel free to read on, but prepared to get
shot down if you ever try to talk with someone in character (IC for
short) about these events. A more detailed look at all of this can be
found in the "official" [New Eden
timeline](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Timeline) (but as I noted,
just because it's in this timeline does not mean it's known to in-game
characters).

By the year 2730, humans had fully colonized our own solar system, which
seemed to take much longer than necessary to colonize a few chunks of
rock in one star system but whatever. It took an additional millennium
before we figured out the secrets to travelling faster than light.
Things were apparently swell for the next few thousand years, as the
timeline doesn't mention much of note, though [some
accounts](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T84nrp08MWo) mention vicious
fights between corporations that control various human-colonized
systems. That began to change in [7703
AD](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/EVE_gate_(Location)) when the
first known massive (supposedly) stable wormhole formed. Humans
discovered this wormhole near the system [of
Canopus](https://forums.eveonline.com/default.aspx?g=posts&m=2505286#post2505286)
in 7987, forever changing the course of human history. The homeward side
of the wormhole was soon named ADAM while the unexplored side was given
the appropriate title of the [EVE
Gate](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2009/12/17/new-eden/). For
simplicity's sake I'll just refer to both gates as the EVE Gate (I
should note that Eve: Source seems to retcon out the fact that the Earth
side of the Gate was known as ADAM but I like it so I'm keeping it
anyway. ARTISTIC LICENSE Y'ALL). The wormhole sent explorers to a far
off system that (in a burst of genius), humans quickly named New Eden.
In a cluster (in again, a burst of genius AND creativity), they named
New Eden. Within two years, colonization of the newly discovered space
was in full swing, with the future homeworlds of the Amarr and Gallente
being purchased and colonized in 7989.

Colonization continued apace for the next few decades, spidering out
quickly from New Eden into the broader cluster. Stations, some still
seen today near New Eden (the system, not the cluster, see how brilliant
the first settlers were?), were erected to protect the first stargates.
Many planets, not all of them yet habitable, were colonized.

Those not yet habitable began being terraformed (Caldari Prime, in
Luminaire, being the most notable example of this). Few colonies were
yet self-sufficient, relying heavily on support from Earth for money and
supplies. Everything seemed to be going swimmingly.

However, problems in the EVE Gate itself soon appeared. It was not quite
as stable as the first colonists had been lead to believe. Terrans (an
umbrella term that refers to any humans that came from the other side of
the Gate) quickly began to build a device to stabilize the wormhole for
continued use. It was a massive undertaking; even 70 years later, it was
not yet done, though it did have the words
"[EVE](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/EVE_Gate)" blazoned on to it
already.

Unfortunately, the stabilizer was too little too late. On February 20,
8061, just 74 years after the wormhole's discovery, it collapsed quite
spectacularly, cutting the fledgling cluster entirely off from Earth and
its desperately needed support. The effect near the site of the gate was
absolutely devastating. Any ships nearby were completely destroyed, and
even in the modern day, the site of the Gate remains a maelstrom of
energy that [only the most dedicated
explorers](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/scientific-articles/interstellar-traveling/)
even attempt to approach. Rumor has it that the remains of Terran ships
can be found in and around the Gate, supposedly with technology far
advanced from what we have available today. The Jove (discussed a little
later in this section, but suffice it to say that they are the fifth
major, but isolated, empire of New Eden), according to that same rumor,
have cloaked the wreckage to prevent it from falling into the wrong
hands. The Jove deny it, of course, but that doesn't stop people from
looking and spreading the rumors. Beyond the immediate vicinity, the
collapse of the Gate caused malfunctions in stargates across colonized
New Eden.

The effect of the collapse of the EVE Gate on the colonies in New Eden
cannot be overstated. Despite being open to colonization for almost 75
years, many colonies were nowhere close to being self-sufficient.
Terraforming wasn't complete in many systems, and even the colonies on
habitable planets often ran into problems of food supplies and other
equipment. Many colonies simply died out from lack of supplies. Most of
the ones that survived fell into the so-called Dark Ages, reverting to
essentially feudal-level technology, reverting back to subsistence-era
technology in attempt to merely survive. Eventually, some civilizations
managed to climb back up into space... but that's getting ahead of
myself.

A Sidenote (Ancient Civilizations)
----------------------------------

Even the lore that we as players know (compared to what we would know as
characters in New Eden) isn't complete. The Dark Ages had some
interesting happenings (of which I will describe as best as possible
here), but exactly what happened after the collapse of the Gate and the
rise of the Amarr is a bit of a mystery.

What little we do know suggests that before the four major empires
arose, there were some civilizations that thrived for a time after the
collapse of the EVE Gate. For whatever reason, these civilizations
either vanished or were grossly transformed. These four "lost
civilizations" are known to us as the Sleepers, the Talocan, the Yan
Jung, and the Takmahl. Information on these civilizations is very
sparse, but I'll try to explain what I can.

The least is known about the [Yan
Jung](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Yan_Jung) and the
[Takmahl](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Takmahl). The Yan Jung
originally settled in Gallente space (conveniently, each of the four
dead civilizations just HAPPENED to settle in areas now controlled by
each of the four major empires), specifically in Deltole. According to
the scant record, they were masters of "advanced gravitronic technology
and force field theories".
[Some](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2011/09/25/yan-jung-ruins/)
[ruins](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2011/09/18/yan-jung-relic-site/)
survive to this day, including a few pieces of working technology.

The Takmahl settled in Amarr space, specifically in the Araz
constellation. They were originally members of the Amarr Empire. An
offshoot of the Sani Sabik faith (who essentially believed that drinking
human blood made you pure, with somewhat predictable results), the
Takmahl were [exiled from Amarr
space](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Unchallenged_Era_of_the_Amarr_Empire#Sani_Sabik_Uprising)
shortly after the Empire gained interstellar travel. While many
survivors of the cult were simply sent free, a number of survivors stole
cryo-ships and ended up in Araz together. More than a little
disturbingly, the Takmahl were considered experts in "cybernetics and
bio-engineering technology." Take that how you will.

Much more is known about the
[Sleepers](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Sleepers_(lore)). They
apparently originally settled in Minmatar space in the Ani
constellation. The Sleepers were [considered
masters](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Sleeper_drones) of "virtual
reality, neural interfacing and cryotechnology." More interesting for
our purposes, the Sleepers were also apparently able to colonize not
only Ani, but also wormhole space (the space only accessible via
natural, but unstable, wormholes). Various active and defunct Sleeper
sites can be found throughout wormhole space (also known among the RP
crowd as Anoikis), with unmanned drones that will defend themselves as
necessary. While all of this is known to the general citizenry of New
Eden, the next paragraph contains information that is not known at all
to the general public (so not known by players when they are playing
IC), but part of the puzzle of the Sleepers have come together both in
*Templar One* and *Eve Source*.

The Sleepers were apparently once part of the Jove race. The Jove
arrived in New Eden in two parts: most of the citizenry were frozen in
cryogenic suspension and connected to each other in a computer program
(yes, just like *The Matrix*); the rest stayed unfrozen, taking care of
the ships and the frozen citizens (if any of the ships were named Zion
I'm quitting). Although most eventually did settle in New Eden, this
concept of a virtual environment remained. When the Second Jove Empire
collapsed (discussed three paragraphs below if you're THAT desperate to
learn), it appears that a faction of Jove simply returned to their
cryotubes and uploaded themselves into the Jove version of the internet.
The remnants of that faction eventually settled in Ani while the rest of
the Jove moved on to their current home, and eventually moved on to
wormhole space (how they moved there, or why, has not yet been
revealed). However, the Sleeper civilization itself is still alive, even
if they rarely leave their virtual world. They survive in their VR
construct to this day, their bodies kept in hibernation, and only very
rarely come out of their hibernation to interact with the real world
(real world in the game... you know what I mean).

The [Talocan](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Talocan) cannot really
be understood without the Sleepers. They originally settled in what is
today Caldari space, in the Okkelen constellation, and are considered to
be experts in "Spatial Manipulation and Hypereuclidean Mathematics." The
strange thing about the Talocan is that they appear to be, in some way,
connected to the Sleepers. In many of the higher classes of wormhole
space, Talocan ruins can be found interwoven with Sleeper structures.
Whether the Talocan conquered the Sleepers, or vice versa, is completely
unknown to us at this point. There is [some
evidence](http://dl.eve-files.com/media/corp/jowen/Jowen_went_to_whiskey_space.pdf)
to suggest, however, that the Sleepers and Talocan eventually joined
forces in wormhole space to fight some kind of disease. Some Sleeper
sites in wormhole space are known as quarantined sites, and will even
today broadcast warnings to stay away. The nature of the disease,
whether it still exists, and whether it affected the Talocan, Sleepers,
or both, are all matters of intense debate among the various RP groups.

The last of the original civilizations are the
[Jove](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Jove). One of the original
colonists of the New Eden cluster, they survived the collapse of the EVE
Gate quite nicely, as they had come through the Gate intending to be
self-sufficient from the start, and managed to form the First Jovian
Empire after just a few centuries. While many of New Eden's colonists
were dying because of their isolation, the Jove managed to kill each
other quite a bit over their differing political and scientific views,
since the Jove are apparently a rather fractious bunch. Nonetheless, the
First Empire eventually spanned much of New Eden once they finally
managed to learn to work together for a bit. And by "a bit," I mean the
First Empire lasted [around 8,000
years](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/races/jove/). However,
no political system lasts forever, and the First Empire was no
exception. A radical faction eventually seized control, and the Empire
eventually collapsed under its own weight (warning: I'm a bit of a
political science nerd so there might be a number of sidetracks on
political theory).

About 3,000 years ago, the Jove managed to climb back to some modicum of
self-control and establish the Second Empire. But there were problems
afoot. You see, the Jove had always been pretty big into genetic and
social engineering, to the point that they had started tinkering with
our most basic human instincts. At some point, however, something went
wrong with the process. The [Jovian
Disease](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Jovian_Disease) is a genetic
(in other words, non-infectious) condition where, at some point in a
Jove's adult life, they fall into an incredibly deep depression, and
eventually lose the will to live. Because the Jove are apparently
*terrible* at smal -scale genetic manipulation and limited testing, the
Disease has spread to the entire race. The Disease devastated the Second
Empire, which collapsed soon after the Disease's appearance (though it's
not clear if the Disease was the only cause of the collapse). In an
attempt to start fresh, the Jovians abandoned their original homeworld
in the region now known as
[Curse](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Curse_(Region)) about 500
years ago. The modern day Third Empire, now much smaller than the first
two, is completely isolated from the rest of the Cluster, and located in
the northeast section of the Cluster. The Jove are split into two main
factions: the Statics, who want to stop tampering with the Jove genome,
and the Modifiers, who apparently love moving those alleles around.
Beyond that, we have very little information on modern day Jove society.
We know that they're governed by something called the [Jovian
Directorate](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Jovian_directorate_(NPC_corporation)),
which seems to operate similarly to the Caldari's Chief Executive Panel,
but other than that, information on the Jove is incredibly scarce.
Indeed, there is at least some suggestion (through both *Templar One*
and some interactions with Sansha's Nation) that the Jove as a race
don't even exist anymore, that they've all died out from the disease.
Whether this is true or not is simply not known at this time, though
it's notable that the Jove haven't sent a delegation to CONCORD in
several years (though, to be fair to the Jove, CONCORD meetings tend to
be pretty boring so I'm not sure I can blame them).

Despite the lack of information on the Jove, they actually play a fairly
major role in the history of the Cluster. They were the ones to first
[give capsule
technology](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/The_Jovian_Wetgrave) to
the Caldari, and eventually the other Empires. They were [instrumental
to the creation of
CONCORD](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/New_Eden_Historical_Overview)
a few years later, and continue to [interfere with Cluster
politics](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Theodicy_(Short_story))
when they've deemed it necessary. Despite their complete isolation (just
try getting into their space, I'll wait), they (or, someone masquerading
as them, depending on who you talk to) continues to exert a subtle, but
significant pressure on the evolution of the Cluster. They have a heavy
corporate presence through companies like Genolution and Impro, but
these are almost entirely run through intermediaries, so not even
company employees see their secret Jove overlords. They don't take a
major role in many stories in New Eden, but even here they show up an
awful lot in passing, so make sure to keep them in mind.

At this point, we've covered all of the deep background for New Eden
lore. We have yet to really touch anything that is particularly relevant
to modern day New Eden affairs, but it's all part of the tapestry of New
Eden. Next, we'll be looking at the history of the four modern empires
as well as the development of CONCORD.

The Empires
===========

In the last part, we looked at some of the deeper history of New Eden,
dating back to the discovery of New Eden itself. In this part, we're
going to be looking at something a little nearer and dearer to all of
our RPing hearts: the history of the modern day empires and their
current statuses. This is by no means intended to give you the full
breadth of information on each of the empires. It won't make you
qualified to be a talking head on a news program (you know, if there
were qualifications for that kind of thing), but it should be enough to
point you in the right direction and at least make for some witty and
charming dinnertime conversation. We'll be covering the four empires in
separate sections before turning our attentions to those lovable scamps
in CONCORD.

The Amarr Empire: God Has a Plan
--------------------------------

We start with the largest and, depending on who you talk to, most
diabolical of the four nations of New Eden: the [Amarr
Empire](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Amarr). Two parts theological
empire, one part bureaucratic morass, with a sprinkling of lifetime
indentured servitude for just a bit flavor, the Amarr Empire is founded
on the idea that the State and the Church are one.

Thus, the [head of
state](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Amarr_Emperor) (currently
Empress [Jamyl Sarum](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Jamyl_Sarum) is
head of the church as well. As with many religions, the Amarr religion
is built on the idea that the only way to attain God's favor is through
following the Amarr path and only the Amarr path; this idea has led to a
number of "Reclaimings" throughout Amarr's history, as they try to save
the rest of the Cluster. The itty bitty, teeny weeny little footnote to
that is that the only truly "saved" people are the True Amarr; anyone
who can't trace their bloodline to the True Amarr are forced to serve
the True Amarr. And if you don't willingly serve the Chosen People, then
the Amarr will be happy to provide you room and board and work for life
in exchange for no pay and little hope of relief. Indeed, the Amarr's
slave control technology is cluster-renowned, with only the Sansha
having more effective techniques.

### History

The Amarr are notable not just for being the largest nation in New Eden
and for being slavers: they also have the singular distinction of having
the oldest recorded history, dating back almost back to the collapse of
the EVE Gate. The Amarr
[Scriptures](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Scriptures) record the
early history of the Amarr race, but like any book going on 15,000 years
old, it's entirely possible that some things may have been lost in
translation over the millennia. Still, being able to trace your history
that far back as a civilization is pretty neat.

The Amarr Empire [originally
started](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Timeline) as a split off sect
of the Unified Catholic Church of Mankind (not that they remember this).
They eventually made their way through the EVE Gate and settled on a
planet called Athra around 8000 AD. Don't recognize the name? Well, the
sect settled themselves on a portion of Athra called [Amarr
Island](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Pre-Space_Flight_Era_of_the_Amarr_Empire#Settlement_of_Amarr_Island)
after the other colonists rejected the Amarr for their even-then crazy
religious beliefs (spoiler alert: the Amarr like to name things after
themselves). They were led by [Dano
Gheinok](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Dano_Gheinok), who is
generally recognized as the first prophet of the Amarr faith (creatively
called just the Amarr faith; I think it was something in the water).

After the exile, like the other empires, the Amarr degenerated both
technologically and socially as support from Earth was cut off. The
island eventually splintered into a number of city-states who had little
contact with each other. Although the church persisted through this
time, it was rather decentralized and unable to exert much control over
the various warlord-governed factions.

The status quo was maintained for an impressive 8,000 years or so
(proving that armor ships aren't the only Amarr things that are slow and
plodding) until a guy named
[Amash-Akura](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Amash-Akura) entered the
history books around [16450
AD](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Pre-Space_Flight_Era_of_the_Amarr_Empire#Foundation).
Amash-Akura was the warlord of the city-state of
[Dam-Torsad](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Dam-Torsad), and he came
up with a brilliant idea: if the two driving forces of the island were
the warlords and the religions... maybe you could try combining the two
and seeing what happened? He quickly earned the approval of the Church,
such as it was at the time, and by 16470, had conquered the entirety of
the island through a combination of diplomacy and brute force. The
warlords who capitulated without violence were named Amash-Akura's
[Holders](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Holders), and the most loyal
Holders were brought together in his [Council of
Apostles](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Council_of_Apostles). The
union of church and state complete, he was crowned Emperor by the
Church, and got a fancy new [royal
symbol](https://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Signs_of_Faith_(Chronicle))
to boot (the story to which is actually kind of neat but this guide is
long enough already).

Under the reign of Amash-Akura, the [Scriptures
record](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Ametat_and_Avetat_(Chronicle)),
that [sefrim](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Sefrim) or angels,
guarded over the island, overseeing an unprecedented era of prosperity.
Even without divine (or, as some theorize, Jove) influence, the
historical records are clear that the island experienced a renaissance,
which was undoubtedly well-overdue after 8,000 years of
Civilization-type wargames. Amash-Akura allegedly reigned for about 100
years. It was around this time that
[Molok](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Molok_the_Deceiver), a member
of the Council of Apostles, attempted a coup against Amash-Akura. The
Scriptures record that the emperor requested help from the sefrim, and
when they refused, he banished them. In response, he aged all 100 years
of his reign in a single night. Many historians, however, believe that
Amash-Akura didn't reign all 100 years. Rather, he died early on, and
the Council of Apostles attempted to assume his identity, which [Molok
then tried to
expose](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Pre-Space_Flight_Era_of_the_Amarr_Empire#Molok.27s_Rebellion).
Either way, Molok lost, Amash-Akura was either recently or long dead,
and the Empire carried on.

The rebellion, however, devastated the countryside. In order to gain
protection, many of the commoners of the island sought out Holders, and
began working the Holders' land in exchange for protection, thus proving
the feudalism was not just a Middle Ages thing. Anyway, during [this
time](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Pre-Space_Flight_Era_of_the_Amarr_Empire#Time_of_Quiet)
the arts began making a comeback as well. Things stabilized to a nice
and quiet (dare I say slow and plodding?) pace.

After a few thousand years (I mentioned the Amarr were a tad slow,
right?), the island began to reach a critical mass; there simply was no
more room to put people. Tensions were relieved by the arrival of the
[Udorians](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Udorians) in 20022 AD.
Whereas the Amarr had settled originally (before that whole exile thing)
on the northern continent of Assimia, the Udorians had taken the two
southern continents. Free to develop technologically (i.e. without a
church to hold them down), in the 12,000 years since the collapse of the
EVE Gate, they had managed to create... boats. Not nuclear submarines,
not cruise liners, or anything, just plain old boats. Something tells me
the Athrans weren't going for a [science
victory](http://civilization.wikia.com/wiki/Victory_(Civ5)#Science_victory),
if you know what I mean.

Anyway, in order to keep the commoners from seeing how wonderful freedom
is when it lets you develop boats, the Emperor at the time decided to
throw them into a religious fervor. Citing Scriptures for the
proposition that the Amarr needed to convert the non-believers, the
empire launched its first
[Reclaiming](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Pre-Space_Flight_Era_of_the_Amarr_Empire#Early_War)
against the Udorians in 20078 AD. The Amarr eventually mastered the
awesome power of boatcraft and was able to take the war to the Udorians,
who were not exactly the most cohesive and organized of people. The
Amarr began pressing captured Udorians into service in order to man the
boats (starting a long and proud tradition of slavery in the process),
and before long, the Amarr made real headway on the southern continents.
It was at this point that the Udorians decided to get their crap
together and offer a real resistance.

Bogged down in the south, the Amarr then turned their attention to the
source of their mommy issues in the first place: Assimia, the continent
from which they were originally exiled. Now filled with a variety of
tribes, the Amarr first set about with their standard Reclaiming
tactics: kill the non-believers and take them as slaves. But these
nomadic tribes were actually fascinated with the Amarr religion, and
soon the Amarr realized that they had potential allies on their hands.
In exchange for converting to the Amarr religion, the no