Foreword by Seismic Stan
========================

EVE Online: The Greatest Story Still Being Told
-----------------------------------------------

Science fiction literature has brought forth many mind-bending and
society-changing stories. From the classic novels of Jules Verne, H.G.
Wells and Aldous Huxley to the grand visions of Arthur C. Clarke, Robert
Heinlein and Philip K. Dick. Entire universes were conjured in our minds
by Asimov's Foundation series and Frank Herbert's Dune saga.

Cinema was quick to embrace the opportunity to portray the future of man
with Fritz Lang's Metropolis and eventually went on to give us the ever
growing extended universes of Lucas' Star Wars and Roddenberry's Star
Trek along with many others, both original works and adaptions of
previously written stories.

Rich futuristic civilisations have sprung forth from other sources too;
Games Workshop's dystopian Warhammer 40,000 universe and FASA
Corporation's feudal BattleTech worlds to name just two. Comics have
given us everything from Dan Dare to Judge Dredd and in recent years
digital entertainment has stepped into the arena with enduring original
storytelling like Half Life and Mass Effect.

But the future of storytelling is changing and EVE Online stands on the
frontier.

When Science-Fiction and Science-Fact Collide
---------------------------------------------

Every story mentioned above, no matter how engaging and wonderful, has
one thing in common: They were all written to be enjoyed by the
individual reader, viewer or player (or in the case of tabletop games, a
small group). EVE Online is different.

EVE Online's universe of New Eden is an epic story told on an
unprecedented scale, enacted and recorded by and for its thousands of
participants. The freeform universe engulfs the player as soon as a
character is created, fusing him into the story by simply being present
in a single-sharded science-fiction universe.

Everyone Plays a Role
---------------------

Even those participants who choose to shun the lore are still woven into
the tapestry as they select their race and bloodline, starship piloting
skills and then head off into the player-populated organisation of their
choice. Every player becomes the citizen of a galaxy seething with
politics and treachery, violence and opportunity.

The lore of EVE Online is not purely a resource for hardcore
roleplayers, it's there to be passively enjoyed by everyone with even a
passing interest in epic science fiction concepts. The themes colour the
environment in which the metagamers plot, it provides character to the
engines of mass destruction flown in huge invasion fleets and it
flavours the tactical equipment options made by every pilot.

In fact, now our entertainment is so immersive, with participants so
involved in adrenaline-pumping ship-to-ship combat, our bodies can't
differentiate between a fictional spaceship environment and a primordial
threat that triggers a fight-or-flight response. Likewise with
pleasure -- we get our dopamine hits from the digital stimuli of our
pixelated victories. Those players who furiously claim that they are not
"roleplayers" would be right in a sense; whether they are an e-sports
combat pilot, a stoic fleet commander or the "King of Space", they
aren't playing a role, they're living it.

No Wizard's Hat Required
------------------------

Yet the depth of fiction available for those who also choose a
lore-driven path of immersion is immense. With a backstory that has
grown organically over the last decade, the epic interplay of warring
civilisations in a universe of amoral, technologically-enhanced humans
can be overwhelming for the newcomer. But fear not, if your interest has
been piqued and you'd like to know how to dip your toe in the pond of
EVE lore -- or perhaps even go for a paddle -- help is at hand. I am
proud to present renowned EVE content-explorer and lorehound Mark726's
[EVE Lore Survival
Guide](http://freebooted.blogspot.com/p/fiction.html).

I approached Mark with the idea of an "EVE Lore for Dummies"-type
concept, knowing his knowledge and writing style would make him the
perfect author for such a project. What I expected was two or three
articles providing a quick insight. What I got was that and much more;
20,000 words of light, well-researched explanation that could be
presented in short, digestible chunks. I have given it pride of place on
my [Freebooted](http://freebooted.blogspot.com/) blog, but I think it
deserves to evolve into something more. I suspect Mark was hoping I'd
stop asking him stupid questions once he'd written it, but now I have a
host of new stupid questions and after reading it, I'm sure you will
too.

The Greatest Story Not Yet Told
-------------------------------

As EVE Online continues to grow and its capsuleers live the story as it
unfolds, we can only hope that the content developers at CCP have the
vision to continue to push the narrative envelope, creating content that
will ensnare and inspire.

H.G. Wells had only the written word to inspire millions and by simply
adding audio he managed to [troll a
nation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_War_of_the_Worlds_%28radio_drama%29).
Just think what is possible with a state-of-the-art server cluster, a
cast and crew of hundreds of thousands and a universe as deep and
stunning as New Eden.

Go tell Asimov, the future is happening. We're living it.

Join us...

An Introduction
===============

Hi everyone. I'm Mark726. You might know me from [EVE
Travel](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/), a blog dedicated to exploring
and explaining the various landmarks (spacemarks?) in New Eden, to aid
anyone looking to sightsee around the Cluster. Seismic Stan approached
me a few years ago now to ask if I was interested in writing an "EVE
Lore for Rookies" blogpost. Well, unfortunately, what originally started
out as "a blogpost" quickly mutated into this, for lack of a better
term, monstrosity.

I had originally hoped that I would be able to cover the major points in
one blog post. Indeed, in starting this Guide, Seismic Stan had
mentioned to me that people were looking for a "cohesive stream of lore"
to follow the story of EVE. After thinking about this for a while, I
came to a realization: just as in real life, there IS no cohesive stream
of lore. Rather, there are many smaller, interwoven threads of stories
that come together to create a whole. I can't explain the background of
the Minmatar without giving background on the Amarr. I can't talk about
the Jove without explaining the EVE Gate. I can't even talk about the
history of interstellar travel without mentioning and explaining, I kid
you not, at least three major other related EVE plot points. The story
of EVE is as interwoven as it is vast.

Still, I'm not one to turn down a challenge. This guide, available on
Eve Travel and elsewhere, is an attempt to give a broad-ish overview of
the history and lore of EVE (a note to you professional RPers: I'd like
to think that I hit the major points in this primer, though I know I by
no means hit them all. If I left something out, it was (hopefully) an
intentional decision on my part, though feel free to argue it with me as
necessary. If I got something wrong, please let me know). Parts of the
guide will be adapted from my own blog entries, other parts will come
from the so-called "prime fiction" (direct from CCP lore, either in the
form of [Chronicles](http://community.eveonline.com/background/potw/),
the occasional book, the newly released *Eve: Source*, or the fantastic
fiction portal found on the old EVE wiki (RIP)), and others from what
must be considered secondary sources (I would be remiss if I did not
mention the fantastic [The Hitchhiker's Guide to New
Eden](http://dl.eve-files.com/media/corp/Ken/The_Hitchhikers_Guide_to_New_Eden_v0.91.pdf)
by Kenreikko Valitonen). For anyone looking for more information on any
of these subjects, these will be your best places to start.

The recent demise of the Evelopedia (RIP) was a significant setback in
some ways, particularly for this lore guide. A lot of the smaller bits
of information that I bring into this guide simply cannot be cited to in
another reputable source, which leaves you, my dear readers, in the
somewhat unenviable position of having to take much of what I say here
on trust (though I'd like to think that with almost a dozen iterations
of this Guide that's not TOO much of a request), rather than being able
to look back at the source materials that I used to formulate the Guide
and explore the available information in more depth. That being said, I
will leave the information that I gleaned from the Evelopedia in for
now, until I see it contradicted in another official source of some
kind. I've combed through and removed the various links to the
Evelopedia that I found (if I missed one, please let me know!), and if I
could find something somewhat suitable to link in its place, I've done
so. Let us hope that CCP gets another lore compilation soon!

The guide will be roughly organized into five parts. In this first part,
I'll detail the deep history of New Eden, dating back practically to our
current day IRL (In Real Life), including the so-called Lost
Civilizations. The next part will look at the history of the five
empires: how they came to be, why they were created, etc, as well as the
development of CONCORD (this part is a doozy of a subject in and of
itself). Part Three (for those more interested in the yarr side of
things) will be looking at the development of the various pirate and
other smaller organizations. The fourth part will look at some of the
technology in New Eden, including the key developments of interstellar
travel, cloning, and interstellar communications, while the last section
will examine some miscellaneous items that don't quite fit anywhere
else.

So, let's get started, shall we?

In the Beginning
================

Let's start off with some very basic information. EVE Online takes place
(as of the posting of this blog) in the year 23,354 AD, or YC 118 (brief
sidenote: I'll return to the YC concept later on for timekeeping in the
section on miscellanea; suffice it for now to say that YC 0 corresponds
to the year 23,236 AD in game terms, and that the year 2016 in the real
world corresponds to YC 118 in game.

The gameworld stretches over approximately 100 light-years, encompassing
approximately 5,000 known star systems collectively in a cluster of
stars we call New Eden (this number jumps to around 7,600 if we include
wormhole space systems), collectively organized into four large nations
(the Amarr Empire, Minmatar Republic, Gallente Federation, and Caldari
State), a smattering of smaller ones, and, on the fringes of known
space, systems entirely controlled by us capsuleers. We are completely
cut off from Earth. Indeed, it's not entirely clear that Earth even
exists anymore, or if there are any other humans out there in the
universe. In terms of lore, New Eden scientists are not even sure if a
mythical place called "Earth" ever existed (the old Evelopedia (RIP)
used to have an entry on the debates occurring in the New Eden
scientific community about whether 'Earth' ever existed), though most
people seem to agree that all humans have a common starting point, even
if we aren't quite clear on where that might be. We, as capsuleers, fly
amongst the stars, literally connected to our ships through cybernetic
implants and direct neural links to our ships' computers, which makes
them an extension of ourselves. Through the wonders of cloning
technology, our consciousnesses can be sent to a new body at the moment
of our body's death, meaning that we are, for all intents and purposes,
immortal.

A brief note before I move on. At times throughout these posts, I'll
make a reference to something but preface it saying that the information
isn't known in game. That's one of the things that many role players
focus on in this game: trying to solve the mysteries of New Eden. There
are quite a few things that we, out of game, know about the game
universe that the general public in New Eden doesn't know. When role
playing, it's important to keep these things separate, since half the
fun of roleplaying for many is trying to solve these mysteries through
in-game or in-character means. If you bring up this OOC knowledge, RPers
will generally politely remind you that these things may not be known.
I'll do my best to set off pretty explicitly that certain information
isn't known in-game or by the general public.

For those of you who are interested in RPing, most of this next
paragraph is probably going to have to be considered off-limits to your
character (for that matter, anything prior to the soon-to-be-mentioned
Dark Ages should as a whole be considered mostly off-limits). Scientists
and researchers in the game simply know almost nothing about the early
years of the New Eden cluster, much less anything that took place before
the collapse of the EVE Gate collapsed. For those of you who don't care
and/or want to know anyway, feel free to read on, but prepared to get
shot down if you ever try to talk with someone in-character (IC for
short) about these events. A [player-built
timeline](http://timeglider.com/t/ed119db9b36b63b5?min_zoom=1&max_zoom=100)
that incorporates news items and goes into more detail than the official
timeline on the old Evelopedia has also been an on-going project.

By the year 2730, humans had fully colonized our own solar system, which
seemed to take much longer than necessary to colonize a few chunks of
rock in one star system, but whatever. It took an additional millennium
before we figured out the secrets to travelling faster than light.
Things were apparently swell for the next few thousand years, as the
timeline doesn't mention much of note, though [some
accounts](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T84nrp08MWo) mention vicious
fights between corporations that control various human-colonized
systems. That began to change in 7703 AD when the first known massive,
(supposedly) stable wormhole formed. Humans discovered this wormhole
near the system of
[Canopus](https://forums.eveonline.com/default.aspx?g=posts&m=2505286#post2505286)
in [7987](http://games.chruker.dk/eve_online/timeline.php), forever
changing the course of human history. The homeward side of the wormhole
was soon named ADAM while the unexplored side was given the appropriate
title of the [EVE
Gate](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2009/12/17/new-eden/). For
simplicity's sake I'll just refer to both gates as the EVE Gate (I
should note that *Eve: Source* seems to retcon out the fact that the
Earth side of the Gate was known as ADAM but I like it so I'm keeping it
anyway. ARTISTIC LICENSE Y'ALL). The wormhole sent explorers to a far
off system that (in a burst of genius), humans quickly named New Eden.
In a cluster (in again, a burst of genius AND creativity), they named
New Eden. Within two years, colonization of the newly discovered space
was in full swing, with the future homeworlds of the Amarr and Gallente
being purchased and colonized in 7989.

Colonization continued apace for the next few decades, spidering out
quickly from New Eden into the broader cluster. Stations, some still
seen today near New Eden (the system, not the cluster, see how brilliant
the first settlers were?), were erected to protect the first stargates.
Many planets, not all of them yet habitable, were colonized. Those not
yet habitable began being terraformed (Caldari Prime, in Luminaire,
being the most notable example of this). Few colonies were yet
self-sufficient, relying heavily on support from Earth for money and
supplies. Still, everything seemed to be going swimmingly.

However, problems in the EVE Gate itself soon appeared. It was not quite
as stable as the first colonists had been lead to believe. Terrans (an
umbrella term that refers to any humans that came from the other side of
the Gate) quickly began to build a device to stabilize the wormhole for
continued use. It was a massive undertaking; even 70 years later, it was
not yet done, though it did have the words "EVE" emblazoned on to it
already.

Unfortunately, the stabilizer was too little too late. On February 20,
[8061](http://games.chruker.dk/eve_online/timeline.php), just 74 years
after the wormhole's discovery, it collapsed quite spectacularly,
cutting the fledgling cluster entirely off from Earth and its
desperately needed support. The effect near the site of the gate was
absolutely devastating. Any ships nearby were completely destroyed, and
even in the modern day, the site of the Gate remains a maelstrom of
energy that [only the most dedicated
explorers](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/scientific-articles/interstellar-traveling/)
even attempt to approach. Rumor (if you can call *Empyrean Age* rumor, I
suppose) has it that the remains of Terran ships can be found in and
around the Gate, supposedly with technology far advanced from what we
have available today. The Jove (discussed a little later in this
section, but suffice it to say that they were the fifth major, but
isolated, empire of New Eden), according to that same rumor, have
cloaked the wreckage to prevent it from falling into the wrong hands.
The Jove deny it, of course, but that doesn't stop people from looking
and spreading the rumors. Beyond the immediate vicinity, the collapse of
the Gate caused malfunctions in stargates across colonized New Eden.

The effect of the collapse of the EVE Gate on the colonies in New Eden
cannot be overstated. Despite being open to colonization for almost 75
years, many colonies were nowhere close to being self-sufficient.
Terraforming wasn't complete in many systems, and even the colonies on
habitable planets often ran into problems of food supplies and other
equipment. Many colonies simply died out from lack of supplies. Most of
the ones that survived fell into the so-called Dark Ages, reverting to
essentially feudal-level technology, reverting back to subsistence-era
technology in attempt to merely survive. Eventually, four civilizations
managed to climb back up into space and currently claim the stars... but
that's getting ahead of myself.

Ancient Races: Dead? Alive? Lost? Found? Who knows!
===================================================

As should be clear by now, there are quite a few things that we, as
players, know about the Eve universe that we, as pilots in-game, do not.
But there is plenty that we do not yet know, even as out-of-character
players. Particularly, the "Dark Ages" of New Eden, which stretch
roughly from the collapse of the EVE Gate to the re-discovery of space
travel by the Amarr, are rather mysterious to both players and pilots
alike. We do, however, know that the spacelanes were not empty at the
time. Indeed, the archeological records indicate that New Eden was a
happening place for those roughly 12,000 years between the end of
recorded history and the, uhh, restart of recorded history. To date, we
know of 5...ish ancient civilizations. Maybe 5 and a half? Maybe only 4?
Look, it's gets complicated. You'll see what I mean in a bit. For now
though, let's start with the easy ones!

Yan Jung
--------

The first of the ancient civilizations we have are the Yan Jung. The Yan
Jung settled in what is now Gallente space (conveniently, each major
empire of today has an ancient civilization of their very own), in the
system of Deltole. A
[few](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2011/09/25/yan-jung-ruins/)
[ruins](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2011/09/18/yan-jung-relic-site/)
survive to this day, but just about all we know of the Yan Jung is that
they were masters of "advanced gravitronic technology and force field
theories." Congratulations! You now know everything I do about the Yan
Jung!

Takmahl
-------

Some more is known about Amarr's very own ancient civilization, the
Takmahl. And quite a bit more can be speculated about them based on what
we do know (and, let's face it, wild speculation is the fun part of
being a lore hound). First off, calling them an ancient civilization is
a bit of a misnomer. Unlike the others I talk about here, they didn't
technically exist during the Dark Ages as I described them above (but
CCP lumps them in with the other civilizations SO WHO AM I TO ARGUE).
Rather, the Takmahl date back to the early ages of Amarr space
exploration. The Takmahl started off as an offshoot of the Sani Sabik
faith, which, as I explain below in the Blood Raider section, is itself
an offshoot of the Amarr faith (which is an offshoot of yet another
faith... it's like religions are hard to stay unified or something!).
Anyway, the Empire has had repeated problems with the Sani Sabik in the
past (because an Empire that condones and is in fact built on the
enslavement of entire races of people is apparently a little weirded out
by blood-drinking, who'd've thunk?), and this time around the Empire's
solution was to shove them all off planet. So in response they packed
their bags, built a few cryoships, and set off into space (I used to
have links in this section but with Evelopedia down (RIP and yes I will
keep saying that) I have no sources other than, well, Source for this. A
replacement of some kind for the lore info on Evelopedia is coming, but
this will have to do for now).

Eventually, it seems likely that a group of those Sani Sabik settled in
the Araz constellation, where they built themselves a heady little
civilization known as the Takmahl. Although they eventually died off for
reasons unknown, there are quite a few similarities between them and the
Blood Raiders, and a connection between the two seems rather probable.

Sleepers
--------

Now we get into the meaty stuff. Despite the fact that I rewrote this
section like 2 versions ago, CCP has deemed fit to make me rewrite it
AGAIN with the release of the chronicle
[Inheritance](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/inheritance/)
(you're going to hear that c hronicle come up a LOT for the rest of this
guide so just stay tuned). But let's start with the basics, shall we?
Sleepers are the mischievous little drones that you'll find crawling
around in
[Anoikis](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/Anoikis_(Chronicle)) (a
fancy way of saying "wormhole space" or "w-space" if you want to try to
fit into the RP/lore crowd).

With the release of Inheritance, a LOT of the questions surrounding the
Sleepers have been cleared up, so let's dig into the basics of what we
know (out of character, at least).

The Sleepers were once a subset of the Jove race (to get
HYPER-technical, they were a subset of the Stasis People (so named
because they preferred life in stasis to real life, but, let's be
honest, sounds like a terrible 50s sci-fi movie), who in turn were a
subset of the Statics sect, who favored slower change in Jove society...
did I mention the Jove love to factionalize?), whose history I dive into
below, when they first came to New Eden. The Jove arrived in New Eden in
two parts: most of the citizenry were frozen in cryogenic suspension and
connected to each other in a computer program (yes, just like *The
Matrix*); the rest stayed unfrozen, taking care of the ships and the
frozen citizens (if any of the ships were named Zion I'm quitting).
Although most eventually did settle in New Eden, this concept of a
virtual environment remained. Eventually, the Second Jove Empire
stumbled its way into Anoikis, and discovered something there (we're
still not quite sure what) that caused some MASSIVE upheaval in the
Empire and (it's heavily wink-wink-nudge-nudged to imply) led to its
eventual collapse. During that collapse and in the ensuing chaos, a
significant chunk of the Statics decided to, in colloquial terms, say
"nuts to this", reloaded themselves back into their virtual reality
environments (which they call the Constructs), and fled into Anoikis
where they settled amongst (and built upon) the various Talocan
structures still present (I had, until Inheritance, always firmly
believed that the Sleepers had settled there first, followed by the
Talocan later but it turns out I was almost certainly WRONG AGAIN. Mark:
0, Inheritance: roughly 4,000). In leaving, a precious few Stasis People
remained behind who knew what had happened but just kind of shrugged
noncommittally when any non-Stasis People asked what had happened. The
Sleeper civilization, i.e. the Jovian survivors from the Stasis People
of the Second Empire, survives to this day, living in various constructs
sprinkled throughout Anoikis, possibly in constructs that we haven't
even seen yet. It seems that the various Sleeper enclaves we see so
often are merely backup facilities. The (current) Jove refer to them
often as Second Empire survivors or the like, and its highly likely that
if we can ever talk to them directly, they'd have a LOT to say about
what happened up to and in the collapse of the Second Empire.

We know a few things about the Sleeper's civilization in the construct.
Living in the Matrix allows them, like in *The Matrix*, to do and test
just about anything they want (including, perhaps, remaking a *Matrix*
that doesn't star Keanu Reeves or have crappy sequels. ANYTHING IS
POSSIBLE), so they were able to push the frontiers of science and
technology. There were just a few simple rules if you were a Sleeper:
you need to have been born in the real world, and you must always have a
body in the real world to return to. Sounds simple, right? It turns out
that this is SURPRISINGLY DIFFICULT. A while back, you see, an
artificial intelligence, untethered to any Sleeper body, was born in the
construct and eventually got loose (once again showing why humanity
can't have nice things). Long story short, this entity lodged itself in
Empress Jamyl's head. For long story... long, take a peek at *Empyrean
Age*, *Templar One* and
[some](https://web.archive.org/web/20160227033727/https:/wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/And_I_Shall_Hide_(Chronicle))
[nifty](https://web.archive.org/web/20160227223209/https:/wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/And_I_Shall_Hide_-_Alternate_(Chronicle))
[chronicles](http://dust514.com/media/fiction/fiveonefour/). The Other
has finally become relevant enough to warrant its own section in this
thing (which I can only assume was its entire goal all along), so we'll
get back to it later on, but suffice it to say that it is not the most
pleasant thing in the galaxy and doesn't seem to have our best interests
at heart.

From what we learn in Inheritance, it seems that age has not been kind
to the Sleepers, and the characters speculate that the Sleepers are
enduring chaotic times in their formerly-utopian constructs (I'm
imagining an amalgam of every Star Trek episode where the holodeck
malfunctions). The Seyllin event, subsequent raiding by meddling
capsuleers and empires, and the Caroline's Star incident have NOT been
conducive to the [continued existence of Sleeper
infrastructure](https://interstellarprivateer.wordpress.com/2016/01/02/the-revelations-of-delegate-zero/),
and the fact that they're probably involved in a fight against the Other
within the constructs certainly doesn't help matters. To say that the
Sleepers are currently "unpredictable" given all the pressure they're
under would be putting it kindly.

In character, we know that the Sleepers once inhabited the Ani
constellation, and we know that at some point they moved on to Anoikis.
While we do not know that the Sleepers still live in their self-made
Matrix, we do know that their drones have been showing signs of activity
as of late. Starting with the appearance of [Caroline's
Star](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2014/11/28/carolines-star/), a
[new type of Sleeper
drone](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/circadian-seekers-ded-advisory/),
never before seen, started invading New Eden and scanning everything it
could get its creepy little claw/hand things on. Until then, the Sleeper
drones had shown little interest in capsuleers other than defending
their various settlements and stations in Anoikis. With the appearance
of the Circadian Seekers and various Sleeper caches throughout New Eden,
however, it is clear that whatever guides the Sleeper drones have taken
a much more active interest in the happenings on our side of the
wormholes. It's pretty clear that they're looking for something, but
exactly what they want is as of yet unknown.

...At this point it shouldn't surprise you to learn that the Sleepers
~~were~~ are considered masters of virtual reality, neural interfacing,
and cryotechnology.

Talocan
-------

I'll be the first to say that I was, uhhhh, slightly kind of very
incredibly wrong about how I characterized the Talocan prior to the
release of Inheritance. I take solace in the fact that the error was not
my fault; the information we had prior to the release of Inheritance was
fairly scant and I felt fairly comfortable in how I had characterized
them based on the information we had. It turns out I was just wrong!
Needless to say, I blame CCP. Or the Goons. Or TEST. Or anyone else but
me, in any case.

Anyway, it turns out that the Talocan were quite the race. As my fellow
lorehound Rhavas [eloquently puts
it](https://interstellarprivateer.wordpress.com/2016/01/15/carolines-star-4-kardashevs-children/),
to the Talocan, "we are gnats, mosquitoes, ants beneath their feet." Why
such grandiose statements? Because while we knew that the Talocan were
considered to be masters of ‘spatial manipulation and hypereuclidean
mathematics', we didn't realize quite what that really meant. When the
Evelopedia says ‘masters of spatial manipulation' they meant it. You
see, the Talocan *created* Anoikis. But let's be very clear about what I
mean here: I don't mean that they went all [Genesis
Device](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tsr-XtuKuSw) on us and created
the stars and the planets there. No; instead they physically altered the
landscape of spacetime in those systems to make creating wormholes
significantly easier than they would otherwise be. I had always wondered
why, out of the trillions upon trillions of stars in the universe, the
wormholes we see in New Eden only connect to about 2,600 or so. It turns
out that those systems get singled out by wormholes because the Talocan
made them special and particularly susceptible to wormhole creation (I
fully expect "because Talocan" to become more popular than the "Because
Jovians" meme and I will be RIGHT HERE if anyone wants to give me credit
for that). They physically altered spacetime in those systems. Let THAT
sink in for a moment. Oh, and I probably don't even need to mention it,
but of COURSE we don't know any of this in-character.

Oh, they also built [Dyson
swarms](https://interstellarprivateer.wordpress.com/2016/01/15/carolines-star-4-kardashevs-children/)
around stars close to going supernova just ‘cause they could. But we'll
get back to that (much) later.

Anyway, so the Talocan were these ultimate super-human people who could
fundamentally alter spacetime and we had no idea until now. Big whoop.
It's probably fine. We do know a few things about them, at least
(in-character, even!). We know that they settled briefly in Caldari
space, in the Okkelen constellation, letting us discover a few things
about them, and we know that they settled in Anoikis after that. We also
know that they created a number of
[epicenters](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2015/01/24/epicenter/) in
some of their settled systems in Anoikis (my guess now would be that
most, if not all, Anoikis systems had an epicenter back in the day but
most have been lost; that's just speculation on my part though) which
seem to act as transit centers, opening up wormholes to other systems
(or potentially anywhere) using the static gates that can be found
there. It seems likely, though its still not quite confirmed, that the
Sansha managed to get their hands on static gate technology, and its
that particular boon that allowed them to invade New Eden with such
gusto a few years back.

But we still have a number of unresolved questions surrounding them.
Perhaps the most ominous question about the Talocan is where they went.
Given their obvious technological superiority, it seems very unlikely
that they died out (which, when you take into account the Sleepers are
still alive the Takmahl kind of, probably are, means 3 of the 4 "dead"
races are still around. COME ON YAN JUNG JUST SAY YOU'RE NOT DEAD SO WE
CAN ROUND OUT THE SET). It becomes much more likely, then, that they
simply got bored of New Eden and went on their merry way. Where? Who
knows!

We also still don't know why most of the Sleeper ruins that incorporate
Talocan technology seem to refer to ‘quarantine' sites and a few other
references to bioresearch, though it seems a tad more likely now that it
is some reference to the Jovian disease, and not something
Talocan-based. Also, we have no idea what their ultimate ends are, and
whether they're even still keeping an eye on us. 3 spookeh 5 me, tbh.

Jove
----

Ah, the Jove. Part of me is tempted to just end this section here, given
how complicated things get once you start heading down this particular
rabbit hole. But that wouldn't make me a very good lore guide, now would
it? So let's go down this rabbit hole together. For science. And
internet spaceships. And maybe some cookies, or something, I don't know.

The Jove have the distinction of being the longest continuous race in
New Eden, setting the record at some 12,000 years or so. The Jove were
one of the last races to come through the Eve Gate before it collapsed,
in the aforementioned giant supercarriers motherships and, somewhat
ironically, one of the least technologically advanced species to come
through. But, unlike most of the other colonies to come through the
Gate, they had been prepared from the start to be entirely
self-sufficient, and settled in nicely in what is now the region of
Curse. So after the Gate collapsed, they managed to pull the First
Jovian Empire together after just a few centuries. While many of the
other Terran colonists were dying from famine, disease, and general
suckitude-at-life, the Jovians were dying for completely different
reasons: they got angry a lot and killed each other.

You see, there are two driving forces that can be found time and again
throughout Jove history: an almost self-destructive need to continually
improve humanity and a strong tendency to factionalize and radicalize.
The [early
history](http://go-dl.eve-files.com/media/1202/Jovian_Timeline__Bonus_Material.txt)
of the Jove is replete with examples of various Jove colonies, which
they often call enclaves, engaging in various research pursuits and
waging internecine warfare against other Jove enclaves. Indeed, the
factionalism of the Jove is well-known among the circles that study
them, even in-game. Regardless, the First Empire managed to stabilize
things for the Jove for quite a while, on the scale of 8,000 years or
so. We should all be so lucky. Still, nothing lasts forever, and
eventually a radical faction managed to seize control of the reins of
the First Empire, resulting in the eventual collapse of the Empire.

From the ashes of the First Empire rose the Second, which, though run by
the entirely democratically-legitimate set of Jovians that called
themselves the Tyrants, managed to stabilize things for a while (and
even managed to go democratic after the first set of

Tyrants passed on from this mortal coil... though I'm not sure that an
elected tyrant is much better than an unelected one). But there were
problems. Oh my, there were problems. As I mentioned, the Jove were big
on perfecting humanity, particularly through the use of genetic
enhancements. This worked well for a while, leading to lifespans of
hundreds of years and increasing Jove intelligence (even if it made them
seem
[creepy](http://o.aolcdn.com/hss/storage/midas/8730a2e765d0fc7b2af1e81540232619/200450495/jove.jpg)
and emotionless). But it eventually became clear that something had gone
wrong with the process. You see, the Jove eventually started tinkering
with the basic human instincts (perhaps in an effort to make
‘transparent skin and overly large, bald heads' attractive on a primal
level). It started manifesting itself as what is today known as the
Jovian Disease. The Disease is a genetic (read: non-infectious)
condition where, at some point in a Jove's adult life, they fall into an
incredibly deep depression, and eventually lose the will to live (or, to
steal a joke [I saw on
twitter](https://twitter.com/dorian_reu/status/699415437172436992), the
Jove just went full-on bittervet and just got sick of logging on.
Probably too much time was spent on failheap or something). Because the
Jove are apparently *terrible* at small-scale genetic manipulation and
limited testing, the Disease has since spread to the entire race. The
Disease devastated the Second Empire, which collapsed right around the
time of the Disease's appearance. Appearances are not always what they
seem, however. Though it was always assumed (we all know what people, or
at least my mother, always says about people who assume...) that the
appearance of the Disease was what precipitated the collapse of the
Second Empire, Inheritance (are you sick of hearing about that chronicle
yet? I- I hope not because a LOT more is coming from it) suggests that
the collapse happened not because of the onset of the Disease, but
because of what the Jove stumbled on in Anoikis, which they had
discovered shortly before the fall. Regardless of the cause, the
collapse of the Second Empire led to what the Jove very helpfully call
the ‘Shrouded Days', a kind of mini-Dark Ages that the Jove don't manage
to exit until the rise of the Third Empire. Few records survive from the
Shrouded Days, and the Jove don't like to talk about it when asked. It
was around this time that the Sleepers said "nuts to this" as previously
mentioned and ran through the wormholes off to Anoikis. Given all the
confusion surrounding the collapse of the Second Empire and the onset of
the Disease, apparently no one noticed that huge chunks of Jove
civilization had gone missing.

In a bid to save what was left of their civilization, the Jove left
their home in
[Curse](http://www.eve-wiki.net/index.php?title=Curse_(Region)) about
500 years ago and settled in their present-day space towards the east of
New Eden. The modern day Third Empire is significantly smaller than the
previous two (though "was" is probably more accurate if you don't mind a
spoiler for 2 paragraphs from now). We know little of the Third Empire's
structure. We know that it's run by something called the [Jovian
Directorate](http://eve.wikia.com/wiki/Jove_Empire), which seems similar
to the Caldari's Chief Executive Panel. We also know that there are two
main factions: the [Statics](http://eve.wikia.com/wiki/Statics), who
want to stop tampering with the Jove genome (thinking the damage is done
and that they shouldn't make things worse), and the
[Modifiers](http://eve.wikia.com/wiki/Modifiers), who apparently love
moving those alleles around (thinking that the only way out of the
Disease is through the looking glass of more genetic engineering). Both
of these factions date much further back than the Third Empire, of
course, but these are just the current incarnations of long-standing
ideological disputes in Jove culture.

Despite this lack of information on the Jove, we know they play a fairly
major role in the history of the Cluster. They were the ones to first
[give capsule
technology](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/short-stories/the-jovian-wet-grave/)
to the Caldari, and eventually the other Empires. They were instrumental
to the creation of CONCORD a few years later, and continue to [interfere
with Cluster
politics](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/short-stories/theodicy/)
when they've deemed it necessary. Despite their complete isolation (just
try getting into their space, I'll wait), they continue to exert a
subtle, but significant, pressure on the evolution of the Cluster, often
through the use of intermediary companies like Genolution and Impro. Oh,
and they liked to spy on the rest of us through the use of, until the
end of 2014, cloaked
[observatories](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2015/04/01/jove-observatory/).
At least they weren't spying on us through the living room window, I
guess (they were almost 100% guaranteed spying on us through the living
room window, let's be honest).

The Jove have been having a bit of a bad time of it, though, and for all
intents and purposes, the ‘Jovian Empire' or ‘Jovian Directorate' or
‘Jovian knitting circle' no longer exists (ok, maybe the knitting circle
still does to help ward off depression). In
[Inheritance](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/inheritance/)
(I am officially sick of citing to this chronicle and we're only on page
14. Screw it, I just won't use its name for the rest of this Guide)
confirms that in the present day, fewer than 100 Jovians exist
throughout New Eden, serving as a sort of rear guard. Intriguingly, the
Chronicle-That-Shall-Not-Be-Named (again) implies that many Jovians
chose to leave New Eden, apparently sailing off into the West or
something, but their ultimate fate in New Eden seems pretty dismal right
now. Those that are left seem to mostly stay around to tidy up some
loose ends, like who gets the Jove's seat on CONCORD's Inner Circle
(spoiler alert: it's the schools set up by the Jove in the first place,
but we'll get to the Society of Conscious Thought later).

There's one more faction that deserves mentioning: the
hilariously-difficult to both spell and pronounce Enheduanni. The
Enheduanni trace their history back to the days that the Jove first came
to New Eden. You'll remember, I hope, those giant motherships the Jove
used to travel to New Eden. They were slow, clunky, and, like any good
game of Homeworld, had most of its population in cryogenic stasis for
the trip. But a small skeleton crew stayed awake to monitor systems, and
this small group eventually became the Enheduanni faction. Not quite
Jove, not quite anything else, they seem to take a more proactive
approach to events throughout the Cluster. They also acted as a
go-between between the Jove and the Sleepers, maintaining a presence in
both the Construct and the Cluster (that's an indie band name if I've
ever heard one). Separating the speculation from the (few known) facts
on them is difficult, but feel free to get a lot of RPers to groan when
you bring them up. The Jove were not a big fan of the Enheduanni
(possibly because of their dumb name), apparently for their love of
intervening with the rest of the Cluster. So, for those keeping score at
home, that leaves us in this section with 2 empires, one Directorate, a
splinter sect of one of those empires, and an anti-Jovian Jovian faction
of Enheduanni all floating around in a Jove history replete with
advanced technology and them spying on us that all collapsed because
they went bittervet on us. And that's not even touching the Drifters
that we get to later on.

Ah, the Jove.

The Empires
===========

In the last part, we looked at some of the deeper history of New Eden,
dating back to the discovery of New Eden itself. In this part, we're
going to be looking at something a little nearer and dearer to all of
our RPing hearts: the history of the modern day empires and their
current statuses. This is by no means intended to give you the full
breadth of information on each of the empires. It won't make you
qualified to be a talking head on a news program (you know, if there
were qualifications for that kind of thing), but it should be enough to
point you in the right direction and at least make for some witty and
charming dinnertime conversation. We'll be covering the four empires in
separate sections before turning our attentions to those lovable scamps
in CONCORD.

The Amarr Empire: God Has a Plan
--------------------------------

We start with the largest and, depending on who you talk to, most
diabolical of the four nations of New Eden: the [Amarr
Empire](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/races/amarr/). Two
parts theological empire, one part bureaucratic morass, with a
sprinkling of lifetime indentured servitude for just a bit of flavor,
the Amarr Empire is founded on the idea that the State and the Church
are one. Thus, the head of state (until recently, this was the
now-departed Empress Jamyl Sarum) is head of the church as well. As with
many religions, the Amarr religion is built on the idea that the only
way to attain God's favor is through following the Amarr path and only
the Amarr path; this idea has led to a number of "Reclaimings"
throughout Amarr's history, as they try to save the rest of the Cluster.
The itty bitty, teeny weeny little footnote to that is that the only
truly "saved" people are the True Amarr; anyone who can't trace their
bloodline to the True Amarr are forced to serve the True Amarr. And if
you don't willingly serve the Chosen People, then the Amarr will be
happy to provide you room and board and work for life in exchange for no
pay and little hope of relief. Indeed, the Amarr's slave control
technology is cluster-renowned, with only the Sansha having more
effective techniques, and those involve turning you into a zombie.

### History

The Amarr are notable not just for being the largest nation in New Eden
and for being slavers: they also have the singular distinction of having
the oldest recorded history, dating back almost back to the collapse of
the EVE Gate. The Amarr
[Scriptures](http://www.eve-search.com/thread/881452/page/all) record
the early history of the Amarr race, but like any book going on 15,000
years old, it's entirely possible that some things may have been lost in
translation over the millennia. Still, being able to trace your history
that far back as a civilization is pretty neat.

The Amarr Empire originally started as a split off sect of the Unified
Catholic Church of Mankind (not that they remember this). They
eventually made their way through the EVE Gate and settled on a planet
called Athra around 8000 AD. Don't recognize the name? Well, the sect
settled themselves on a portion of Athra called Amarr Island after the
other colonists rejected the Amarr for their even-then crazy religious
beliefs (spoiler alert: the Amarr like to name things after themselves).
They were led by [Dano
Gheinok](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/races/amarr/timeline/),
who is generally recognized as the first prophet of the Amarr faith
(creatively called just the Amarr faith; I think it was something in the
water).

After the exile, like the other empires, the Amarr degenerated both
technologically and socially as support from Earth was cut off. The
island eventually splintered into a number of city-states who had little
contact with each other. Although the church persisted through this
time, it was rather decentralized and unable to exert much control over
the various warlord-governed factions.

The status quo was maintained for an impressive 8,000 years or so
(proving that armor ships aren't the only Amarr things that are slow and
plodding) until a guy named Amash-Akura entered the history books around
16450 AD. Amash-Akura was the warlord of the city-state of
[Dam-Torsad](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/dam-torsad/),
and he came up with a brilliant idea: if the two driving forces of the
island were the warlords and the religions... maybe you could try
combining the two and seeing what happened? He quickly earned the
approval of the church, such as it was at the time, and by 16470, had
conquered the entirety of the island through a combination of diplomacy
and brute force. The warlords who capitulated without violence were
named Amash-Akura's Holders, and the most loyal Holders were brought
together in his Council of Apostles. The union of church and state
complete, he was crowned Emperor by the church, and got a fancy new
[royal
symbol](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/signs-of-faith/)
to boot (the symbolism of which is actually kind of neat but this guide
is long enough already).

Under the reign of Amash-Akura, the [Scriptures
record](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/ametat-and-avetat/)
that sefrim, or angels, guarded over the island, overseeing an
unprecedented era of prosperity. Even without divine (or, as some
theorize, Jove) influence, the historical records are clear that the
island experienced a renaissance, which was undoubtedly well-overdue
after 8,000 years of Civilization-type wargames. Amash-Akura allegedly
reigned for about 100 years. It was around this time that Molok, a
member of the Council of Apostles, attempted a coup against Amash-Akura.
The Scriptures record that the emperor requested help from the sefrim,
and when they refused, he banished them. In response, he aged all 100
years of his reign in a single night. Many historians, however, believe
that Amash-Akura didn't reign all 100 years. Rather, he died early on,
and the Council of Apostles attempted to assume his identity, which
Molok then tried to expose. Either way, Molok lost, Amash-Akura was
either recently or long dead, and the Empire carried on.

The rebellion, however, devastated the countryside. In order to gain
protection, many of the commoners of the island sought out Holders, and
began working the Holders' land in exchange for protection, thus proving
the feudalism was not just a Middle Ages thing. Anyway, during this time
the arts began making a comeback as well. Things stabilized to a nice
and quiet (dare I say slow and plodding?) pace.

After a few thousand years (I mentioned the Amarr were a tad slow,
right?), the island began to reach a critical mass; there simply was no
more room to put people. Tensions were relieved by the arrival of the
Udorians in 20022 AD. Whereas the Amarr had settled originally (before
that whole exile thing) on the northern continent of Assimia, the
Udorians had taken the two southern continents. Free to develop
technologically (i.e. without a church to hold them down), in the 12,000
years since the collapse of the EVE Gate, they had managed to create...
boats. Not nuclear submarines, not cruise liners, or anything, just
plain old boats. Something tells me the Athrans weren't going for a
*science victory*, if you know what I mean.

Anyway, in order to keep the commoners from seeing how wonderful freedom
is when it lets you develop boats, the Emperor at the time decided to
throw them into a religious fervor. Citing Scriptures for the
proposition that the Amarr needed to convert the non-believers, the
empire launched its first Reclaiming against the Udorians in 20078 AD.
The Amarr eventually mastered the awesome power of boatcraft and was
able to take the war to the Udorians, who were not exactly the most
cohesive and organized of people. The Amarr began pressing captured
Udorians into service in order to man the boats (starting a long and
proud tradition of slavery in the process), and before long, the Amarr
made real headway on the southern continents. It was at this point that
the Udorians decided to get their crap together and offer a real
resistance.

Bogged down in the south, the Amarr then turned their attention to the
source of their mommy issues in the first place: Assimia, the continent
from which they were originally exiled. Now filled with a variety of
tribes, the Amarr first set about with their standard Reclaiming
tactics: kill the non-believers and take them as slaves. But these
nomadic tribes were actually fascinated with the Amarr religion, and
soon the Amarr realized that they had potential allies on their hands.
In exchange for converting to the Amarr religion, the nomads would help
finish the fight with the Udorians. The nomadic tribes eventually earned
the collective nickname of
"[Khanid](http://eve-history.net/wiki/index.php/Khanid)" or "little
lords."

With their newfound Khanid allies, the Amarr eventually managed to
finish the conquest of the southern continents. With the two southern
continents, Amarr Island, and much of Assimia conquered, the Amarr
consolidated their holdings instead of immediately pressing on to the
heretofore unexplored eastern hemisphere. The conquest had spurred
technological innovations of all sorts (perhaps adding the all-important
"rudder" to the aforementioned boats). During this era of consolidation,
the various great houses began to emerge, such as the Khanids and the
Ardishapurs. They controlled vast swaths of territory, and were only
nominally responsible to the then-dominant Council of Apostles.
Eventually, however, there was a hunger for more slaves, and the Amarr
pressed on with their Reclaiming of Athra. By 20544, the Amarr had
conquered the rest of the planet and, in a move that once again called
Athra's water quality into question, renamed it Amarr Prime.

Within a few hundred years of conquering the planet, the Amarr had made
it into space and begun exploring and colonizing the rest of the system.
Progress was slow, but by 21134 AD, the Amarr were ready to look beyond
their current system. Thankfully, around this time they [stumbled
across](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/scientific-articles/interstellar-traveling/)
the ruins of a surprisingly well-preserved Terran stargate. They quickly
realized the promise of the new/old technology, and set about
constructing a companion gate in Hedion (it's mildly surprising that
they didn't just call this Amarr 2), the closest star to Amarr, with the
gate opening for use in 21290 AD. With the cluster now as their oyster
(that's admittedly a metaphor I've never figured out), the Empire began
spidering out from Amarr, with the Emperor soon granting the more
powerful families vast swaths of interstellar space. Around this time,
some issues cropped up with both the Equilibrium of Mankind and the Sani
Sabik, but frankly this section is already bigger than intended so we'll
just come back to them later. Just note that this is about the time that
Amarr had issues with the crazies (as opposed to all the \*other\* times
they dealt with crazies).

Like, you know, the crazy emperor. In 21346, Zaragram II was chosen by
the Council of Apostles to ascend to the throne. Things started off
innocuously enough, until Zaragram decided that he was the new divine
manifestation of God in the universe (as opposed to merely being God's
representative, I think. Theology confuses me sometimes). He attempted
to rewrite the Scriptures to place himself as the central figure of the
story, and even tried to build his own [City of
God](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2010/01/07/city-of-god/) to prove
his divinity (no this entire paragraph wasn't included to pimp my blog,
definitely not, don't be ridiculous). Thankfully, the Council of
Apostles came to see the error of their way and, in a move that surely
proved constitutionally stable, had Zaragram assassinated, founding the
Cult of St. Tetrimon in the process, who continues to pop up now and
then as preservers of the "true" Amarr scriptures and general
maintainers of Amarr culture.

Also during Zaragram's reign, slavery began to die out. You see, while
slavery is horrible and all, many Amarr had enough human decency to
release their slaves once a Holder felt the slave was pious enough.
Since there hadn't been much of an infusion of new blood into Amarr
society in quite some time, this meant that slavery was slowly fading as
an institution as it was becoming prohibitively expensive to acquire new
ones. Only something crazy like finding a completely new race of humans
to enslave would save the institution at this point, which of course
meant that the Ealur were discovered in 21423. The Amarr, in now
familiar fashion, started a Reclaiming, a new slave population was
secured, and slavery enthusiasts everywhere breathed a sigh of relief.

A few hundred years after Zaragram's disastrous reign, Emperor Heideran
V, a Kador, decided that he too would like to make a power grab, it
apparently being the style of the time. Alarmed and having seen this
ploy before, the Council attempted to eliminate Heideran. Unlike
Zaragram, however, Heideran was actually sane, and managed to get many
of the most powerful families on his side, including the Kor-Azor,
Ardishapur, Sarum, and Khanid (all names that should look at least
vaguely familiar), and began enacting the Moral Reforms. Although these
five families were members of the Council of Apostles, they didn't have
undisputed control of the Council. After encountering resistance to his
reforms, Heideran declared the Council dissolved. Needless to say, the
Council disagreed with that assertion. And so the Empire decided to go
to war with itself. Never forced to fight technological equals before,
the two sides of the Amarr Navy initially managed to cancel each other
out. However, after over half a century, the Sarums and the Khanid
learned the value of having actual strategic combat, and the Emperor's
side eventually won out (to be fair to the Amarr, not much strategy is
necessary when many planets had just discovered the value of tying sharp
rocks to a stick).

After the war concluded, the Emperor, along with his newly minted
Theology and Privy Councils, finished up his Moral Reforms, bringing the
Empire into the form we're familiar with today. This involved heavy
modification of the Scriptures to hand over more power to the Emperor.
The Cult of St. Tetrimon, however, reared its head to save at least some
of the original text. The Reforms are generally regarded as ending in
21950 AD. Afterward, Amarr exploration continued in its slow, plodding
pace. The Ni-Kunni were discovered around this time, but given their low
technology level and willingness to embrace the Amarr faith, they were
incorporated with little difficulty.

In [22355 AD](http://games.chruker.dk/eve_online/timeline.php), the
Amarr ran into another small tribal culture. You've probably never heard
of that crazy tribal nation called the Minmatar. Without delving into
too much detail here, suffice it to say for now that the Minmatar Empire
spanned 3 systems at the time of discovery. The Matari were the first
species the Amarr encountered who also had attained interstellar flight,
and the Amarr held off and observed the Matari for quite a while before
beginning to skim off populations in small strikes. It took another 125
years before the Amarr finally struck big. During a freak storm that cut
off communications across much of Pator, the Amarr struck, lifting
millions off the colonized planets in the system into slavery. That day
quickly became known as the [Day of
Darkness](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-day-of-darkness/).
It took another 5 years, until 22485, before the Matari systems were
completely incorporated into the Empire. Having learned a few tricks
from the Ni-Kunni, the Amarr tried to entice the Matar with both honey
and vinegar. Eventually, Amarr wooing won over the Nefantar tribe, who
won much more autonomy than the other tribes in exchange for helping the
Empire find the last few free Matari holdouts.

Following the conquest of Pator and its colonies, the Empire entered
into an almost uninterrupted peace that lasted nearly 700 years. The
Empire, following the well-established axiom of "if it ain't broken
don't fix it" continued plodding its way slowly across the Cluster
(here's a fun game: count how many times I use "slow" and "plodding" in
this section). Unfortunately, this era of peace ended with the ascension
of Heideran VII to the throne in 23041, which led to the Empire losing
the Khanid (see the section on the Khanid Kingdom below for more
information), one of the 5 Heir families.

Following that, the Theology Council made the surprising move of
elevating the first Udorian family, the Tash-Murkon, to Heir status.
This was the first time a family of non-True Amarr ancestry was eligible
for the throne.

As you may have noticed, we're not all Amarr slaves, so at some point,
the Amarr were bound to run into someone that they couldn't Reclaim.
That happened in 23180, when an Amarr scoutship discovered a Gallente
scoutship. In my mind's eye, the event went down as two incredibly wary
10 meter cats in space, slowly circling each other and eying each other
up, which is both terrifying and adorable at once. The Amarr blinked
first, activating a cyno, which scared off the Gallente (who hadn't seen
one before), who ran off using a warp drive, which then scared the Amarr
(who hadn't seen that before), who also ran off. I knew this cat analogy
was going to work out. ...Except the part where they initiated a
diplomatic exchange, I suppose.

Anyway, it turns out the two nations hated each other. One liked to
enslave people, and the other found that, uhh, not good. But because the
Gallente were essentially on par with the Amarr, the Empire was hesitant
to attempt what would undoubtedly be a costly and gruesome Reclaiming,
even if the Gallente were godless heathens. Both sides realized that
they could not fight one another and, in an effort to quell simmering
tensions, entered into the Gallente-Amarr Free Trade Agreement in 23210.
In a shocking turn of events, politicians gave a name to something that
wasn't entirely accurate, as the GAFTA imposed significant limitations
on trade for both sides. But it was a start.

The Caldari eagerly introduced themselves to the Empire in 23187, hoping
to find a new ally against the Gallente. But like most overeager people
trying too hard to make friends, the Amarr ended up being put off by the
Caldari (the lack of wanting to be slaves for the rest of their lives
might also have had something to do with it).

Whereas the Caldari were overeager schoolchildren, the Jove were the
creepy loner kids. They popped up on the Amarr border in 23191,
announced that they existed, and then left. Taking this as a sign of
weakness, the Amarr set their eyes on the Jove in 23216, being in a
conquering mood at the time, and leading to the very, very short-lived
Amarr-Jove War. The war consisted primarily of the Amarr getting their
butts handed to them at the [Battle of
Vak'Atioth](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-battle-of-vakatioth/)
(the system, now called merely
[Atioth](http://evemaps.dotlan.net/system/Atioth), unfortunately has no
wreckage from the battle. Trust me, I've checked. Repeatedly. It-it's
kind of a sore point with me). *Templar One* suggests that the impetus
for the war was the result of some internal political strife led by
Jamyl Sarum's father.

The Minmatar, sensing opportunity, chose the Empire's defeat at
Vak'Atioth to begin their Star Warsian rebellion against the Empire,
with millions of Amarr dying in the first few days. The Amarr were
completely unprepared for a rebellion of such magnitude, and they
quickly retreated out of Minmatar space. [By the end of
23216](http://games.chruker.dk/eve_online/timeline.php), the Minmatar
had claimed much of the modern day Republic, with sympathizers among the
Minmatar (primarily the Nefantar) settling into the current day Ammatar
Mandate to create a buffer zone between the two nations.

After the rebellion, things settled down quite a bit for the Empire.
Fearing the Gallente would also take advantage of the newfound Amarr
vulnerability, Heideran (remember him?) began negotiations for a Caldari
non-aggression pact, entered into in 23222. The assault of peace
continued in 23230 when Heideran agreed to enter into the negotiations
that ultimately led to CONCORD. Tensions [continued to
simmer](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/quafe) a bit
with the Gallente, but capitalism proved its mettle by ultimately
winning out over both sides.

Modern history of the Amarr arguably starts with the death of Heideran,
who had recently published his magnum opus on the future of New Eden,
the Pax Amarria. With Heideran's passing in YC 105, the search for a new
Emperor began, with Doriam II, the Kor-Azor Heir, eventually winning
out. The Doriam Imperium was fraught with tensions, culminating with his
assassination in YC 107. With the Heirs unwilling to give up their
newfound power after only two years, the Empire collectively shrugged
its shoulders and dealt with the Regency of Doriam's court chamberlain,
Dochuta Karsoth.

Karsoth's regency was, to put it kindly, an unmitigated disaster. [Heirs
went crazy and then were born
again](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-speakers-of-truth/),
Holders fought Holders, and the Cult of St. Tetrimon (yes they still
exist) was allowed back into the Empire.

Things culminated for the good regent in June YC 110. The Starkmanir,
the Seventh Tribe of Pator that was long thought to be extinct, [had
recently been
discovered](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/breaking-news-large-starkmanir-slave-population-discovered-in-ammatar-consulate/)
tucked away in the Ammatar Mandate. Within a few weeks of discovery, a
massive Matari fleet, [led
by](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/report-minmatar-thukker-task-force-are-minmatar-elders/)
the Minmatar Elders and constructed in secret, [shut down
CONCORD](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/breaking-news-concord-restores-counterthreat-capability-issues-general-warning-to-cease-hostilities/)
and invaded Amarr space. The invading fleet rescued scores of the
Starkmanir, and then did what any good invading fleet should: sack and
pillage. The fleet [got as far as Sarum
Prime](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/breaking-news-massive-explosion-detected-over-mekhios/),
one jump from the Throne Worlds and home of the Sarum family, when they
were
[stopped](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/breaking-news-elder-fleet-over-mekhios-destroyed/)
by one Jamyl Sarum. Sarum, one of the Five Heirs during the Doriam
succession trials, had been presumed dead due to, you know, society and
millennia of tradition demanding it of her. But apparently this all
worked out for the best, as Sarum was able to stop the invading fleet
with what was apparently a Terran superweapon (fleshed out more in
*Empyrean Age*). The Amarr then declared war on the Minmatar, starting
up the faction wars (though to be fair, just about anything, including
the Amarr finding more things to name after themselves, causes Amarr to
declare war against the Republic). With the Empire secure, the Theology
Council again apparently decided to say "screw it" to the Succession
Trials, and we had ourselves a new Empress.

Oh, and did I mention that it turns out Karsoth was really a [Blood
Raider](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/of-god-and-her-beast/)
sympathizer and he got exiled and [later
executed](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/two-deaths/)?
Man, you just don't get this kind of excitement in Gallente space.

The reign of Jamyl saw its ups and downs. Perhaps the most notable event
(and since I'm the author I get to say what's notable) demonstrated that
the Amarr Empire, for all I make fun of them, is still capable of
semi-decent acts now and then. First off, Jamyl declared soon after
taking power that any slave of ninth generation or up was
[emancipated](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/empress-jamyl-i-makes-historic-emancipation-announcement/).
This obviously sent shockwaves throughout the Empire and Republic alike,
as the Holders hadn't exactly been consulted about losing around 800
million members of their workforce, and the Republic wasn't quite
prepared to handle 800 million new citizens. I realize this is a bit
like saying "see, they decided to kill *fewer* people so good for them"
but a start is a start, I suppose. For a while, Jamyl disappeared from
the public eye, leading to rumors and speculation that she had taken ill
in some way. It PROBABLY had something to do with the [voice that lived
in her
head](https://web.archive.org/web/20160227223209/https:/wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/And_I_Shall_Hide_-_Alternate_(Chronicle)),
but let's face it, getting a rogue hyper-intelligent AI to take up
residence in your noggin probably doesn't exactly do wonders for your
health, now does it?

Naturally for Eve, Jamyl's story doesn't end happily. A few months
before her untimely demise, Jamyl had [started making public appearances
again](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/empress-jamyl-i-visits-amarr-navy-headquarters/),
ostensibly to show off the upcoming commissioning of the Empire's new
flagship, a specially-fitted Abaddon-class vessel to be named TES
*Auctoritas*. Her public reappearance coincided with the Drifters
becoming [more and more
aggressive](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/breaking-news-drifter-autopsy-press-conference-interrupted-1/)
in their pushback against Cluster powers and, inevitably, the two
storylines became more and more intertwined. Indeed, the Drifters seemed
particularly rattled at the prospect of *Auctoritas*'s commissioning,
leading not
[one](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/cleanup-begins-in-aftermath-of-safizon-attack/)
but
[two](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/imperial-navy-forces-push-back-second-drifter-advance/)
assaults against the station where the vessel (with advanced, but
unspecified, weaponry) was being constructed. If you can't see where
this is going, spoiler alert: Jamyl dies. On the day *Auctoritas* was to
be commissioned, the [Drifters attacked Jamyl's titan in a lightning
strike](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4e5NtEP4zj4), downing it in an
alpha-strike using their doomsday weapons, and really rubbed it in by
podding her moments later. Within hours, Court Chamberlain Pomik Haromi
[confirmed the
death](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/court-chamberlain-confirms-death-of-empress-jamyl-i/)
of the Empress. Unsurprisingly, this led to the Empire
[issuing](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/breaking-news-amarr-empire-declares-war-on-drifters/)
a formal [declaration of
war](http://cdn1.eveonline.com/community/news/2015/GameWorld/RELEASE%2060008488.pdf)
against the Drifters. On the plus side, Chamberlain Haromi seems to have
no desire to pull a Karsoth, and the end of the Succession Trials should
be upon us in [April at
Fanfest](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/house-tash-murkon-dominates-in-imperial-succession-trials-finals-set-against-house-kor-azor/).

### Social Structure

The government of the Empire is delightfully complex, as you might have
guessed, as it is essentially a modern day feudalist structure. Each
governance layer can do whatever they want within their territories, as
long as it doesn't violate Scripture or law from higher up the chain. On
the very top we have the Emperor, who can basically do whatever the heck
he (or, as the case may be, she) wants. However, while her edicts are
often unquestioned, she only really can exert direct power over the
labyrinthine Amarrian bureaucracy when present in person to see that her
orders are carried out (it turns out that Amarr never learned its
lessons from [*Trantor*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trantor)). Below
the Emperor sits the rump of the Council of Apostles, the Privy Council.
The various Heirs have a seat at the Council table, as do the heads of
the various ministries, as well as the Court Chamberlain, who can often
act as the voice of the Emperor and governs over the Empire during
interregnums as regent. Speaking of the Heirs, each governs a portion of
the Empire (with either the region they rule or the home planet
generally being named after the various Heirs, in a continuing display
of Amarr humility).

The five
[Heir](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/races/amarr/heirs/)
families are the Ardishapurs, Kadors, Tash-Murkons, Kor-Azors, and
Sarums, with each house having their own political views on both social
and foreign policy issues. The current Heirs are Yonis, Uriam, Catiz,
Aritcio, and Merimeth, respectively. The Ardishapurs are generally seen
as the most religiously conservative House, advocating that the Empire
adhere to Scripture as much as possible. Given the peculiarities of
Jamyl's assent to the throne, Yonis (generally a schemer) likewise was
not generally pleased with her, but only sought to undermine her
positions in private when it wouldn't hurt the Empire. The Kador
family's primary aim is restoring/celebrating the grandeur of the Empire
while maintaining strict splits between the various classes of society.
Uriam Kador, originally seen as a rising star in the House that has
spawned more Emperors than any other, made some crucial missteps early
on in his tenure (like invading Gallente space because why not?) and has
been working ever since to restore his reputation. The Tash-Murkons, as
I've noted, are newcomers to the whole Heir thing, and perhaps because
of that they are seen as more liberal than the other Houses, preaching
mobility between the classes and allowing just about anyone to become a
Holder, regardless of background. Catiz, an upstart entrepreneurial
go-getter, decided to strike out on her own before assuming her role as
Heir, and started her own (incredibly successful) mining business before
folding it in to Tash-Murkon's more general holdings (tl;dr she's
stinking rich and likes being stinking rich). The Kor-Azors are
generally the diplomats of the Empire, seen as centrists who seek
compromise between the various blocs. Like Uriam, Aritcio had a bit of a
rough start (though more of the "I like torturing people and being
CRAZY" kind instead of the "let's invade our space neighbors because why
not" kind), but after some, ah, "gentle" interventions (never have my
use of air quotes been more sarcastic), Aritcio turned a new leaf and
has become beloved for his caring attitude towards his subjects (and
also, no joke, [goes around fighting crime and righting wrongs under
cover](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-part-where-i-play-the-devil/).
Remember, kids, always be yourself. Unless you can be Batman. Then,
[always be
Batman](https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/0a/71/1a/0a711aeaa44c80daf02f03c1723ea307.jpg)).
Finally, the Sarums are most well-known for their aggressive (or, for
those less diplomatic, war-mongering) foreign policy stances while
maintaining a fairly conservative stance on social issues at home.
Merimeth has mostly remained in his aunt's shadow but earned some
accolades of his own for rebuilding Sarum Prime after the Elder invasion
and has been looking for other ways to prove himself. The Khanids,
generally seen as a tad more liberal than mainstream Amarr thought, have
also been granted a seat by Empress Jamyl in light of the Kingdom's
recent rapprochement with the Empire.

Unfortunately, we already know that Yonis, Uriam, Garkeh (who,
surprisingly, was allowed to participate in the Trials given his past...
problems with followthrough), and Merimeth are [not long for this
world](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/house-tash-murkon-dominates-in-imperial-succession-trials-finals-set-against-house-kor-azor/);
the only question is whether Catiz or Aritcio will be joining them on
the chopping block at this point. Other Heirs are [already waiting in
the
wings](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/amarr-heirs-elect-confirmed-by-royal-houses-ahead-of-trials-of-the-champions/)),
but I'll at least let the current Heirs' corpses cool before talking
about the new ones in-depth.

Getting back to the structure of the Empire, alongside the Privy Council
is the Theology Council, which acts as the final interpreter of what the
Scriptures say as well as a final court of appeals on any question of
religion or sin. Alongside this responsibility is the maintenance of the
Book of Records: a nearly uninterrupted genealogy of the Empire dating
back to Amash-Akura's time. An Amarr citizen being stricken from the
Book is one of the gravest punishments that exists (beyond, you know,
death). Below the Heirs, Holders of various significance often control
the nitty-gritty details of local governance.

A few notes about the selection of the Emperor. Emperors are chosen by
the [Succession
Trials](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/amarr-succession/),
which have their roots in the Scriptures 2.0 (The Scripturing) that came
into place following the Moral Reforms. The Trials pit the five Heirs
(or, in more recent years, Heir-appointed Champions) against each other
in a series of tests designed to see who most holds God's favor in
becoming the next Emperor. The winner takes the Throne, while the
losers, in an attempt to keep them from usurping said Throne, must
commit Shathol'Syn: ritual suicide (continuing the Amarr's reputation as
a Super Cheery Bunch). Beyond that, Emperors are required by the
Doctrine of Sacred Flesh to keep their bodies ‘pure' which,
surprisingly, does NOT mean that they have to give up GMO foods but
rather means that they can't be cloned. Getting healed in a bacta tank,
kept alive by machines, or even the use of stem cells, perfectly fine!
Getting cloned? A big no-no. Though, given that Jamyl ended up with a
hyper-intelligent evil AI out to doom us all in her head, I suppose for
once I can't really fault the Amarr for one of their crazy traditions
(which knocks out one tradition but thankfully leaves the other 4,999
ridiculous traditions ripe for mocking). Anyway, Jamyl managed to start
her reign off with quite the scandal when the Empire realized that in
order to survive Shathol'Syn (something that, heretofore, had generally
been considered a permanent solution to the usurper problem), she would
have had to have herself cloned, violating both the

Doctrine of Sacred Flesh and thumbing its nose at the spirit of
Shathol'Syn. However, given that she had just saved them all from
Elder-wrought destruction, the Empire (with a few exceptions)
collectively shrugged its shoulders at this shocking breach of a
tradition with a firmly apathetic "meh".

Anyway, below the Holders, we reach the commoners, or middle class of
the Empire, and then everyone's favorites, the slaves, who hold the
approximate political rights of a toadstool (though with perhaps
somewhat better housing options). As you might expect, the Empire is
pretty regimented by class. It might surprise you to learn, however,
that the Empire is surprisingly diverse, ethnically speaking. Though the
majority are True Amarr, the Minmatar tribes and others take up a
significant chunk as well (and not just as slaves!).

### Roleplaying Tips

Before I dig in to a few tips for RPing the Amarr, I just want to
mention something for the aspiring RPers out there. In these sections,
I'll be mentioning some broad guidelines that MOST RPers try to adhere
to in playing their characters in a respective background. But that
being said, just as in real life, you can find all kinds of people in
the Empires. Just because I might say that the Amarr are super
religious, doesn't mean they ALL are. Feel free to go against the grain
or go with it, I'm just trying to offer some hints if you're interested.

Those of you looking to RP an Amarr character should find it pretty
easy. Broadly, there's two categories of Amarr characters: those who
honestly believe in the Amarr religion and will work to Reclaim other
people, and those who really don't believe in the religion but pretend
to for greater personal gain (there is some suggestion in *Templar*
*One* that even Empress Jamyl falls into this latter category).
Regardless of personal motivations, Amarrians (Amarr? There's no clear
distinction in the literature either way and I use the terms
interchangeably) are generally seen as haughty and, as could be
expected, rather holier-than-thou. True Amarr suffer the most from this
type of condition, of course, since they are God's Chosen People. What
little is known about the Ni-Kunni suggests that they have long been
absorbed by the Empire and accept their place, even if it is near the
low rungs of the Empire's society. The Khanid are a bit unique in that
some of the race has split off into the Khanid Kingdom, but a
significant chunk of the bloodline remains Imperial subjects. In
general, the RP crowd tends to split amongst Royal Houses rather than
the formal bloodlines. There are varying degrees of how dedicated to the
faith a person is, how much they accept Jamyl's rule, and how much
sympathy they feel for slaves and former slaves. That said, Amarr also
tend to be friendly towards the Caldari (apparently in an "enemy of my
enemy is my friend" type approach), solidified by economic ties.

The Minmatar Republic: 7 Tribes for 7 Brothers
----------------------------------------------

It shouldn't be surprising that the history of the [Minmatar
Republic](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/races/minmatar/) is
intimately interwoven with the history of the Amarr (unless you've been
living under a rock, or, you know, not reading the section before this).
While the Minmatar are a rich culture in their own right, of course, the
brutal enslavement for centuries left an indelible mark on their
society, and in many ways still dictates how the Republic and individual
Minmatar react to many situations. Currently headed by Sanmatar Maleatu
Shakor, the Republic is really only a Republic in name, given that
Shakor disbanded the Republic Parliament when he came to power a few
years back, though he has created a tribal council in its stead. This
has done little to affect the temperament of the Republic, however, and
the Minmatar remain a deeply spiritual people, dedicated to their tribes
and their Elders. The Minmatar consist of seven different tribes, each
now united and represented in some way in the Republic: the Thukkers,
the Brutors, the Nefantar, the Starkmanir, the Sebiestor, the Krusual,
and the Vherokior.

### History

The deep history of the Minmatar is a bit more hidden than the Amarr's.
We know that Pator, the Matari home system (‘Matari' and ‘Minmatar,'
like ‘Amarr' and ‘Amarrian,' are fairly interchangeable, with no
definitive usage rules coming out of the literature, although
preferences do vary), was settled around [8017
AD](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/races/minmatar/timeline/)
and quickly developed due to Matar's (Pator IV's) hospitable climate. We
know little of the Minmatar's early history. The history books indicate
that shortly after the tribes had all contacted each other, but before
they were in regular contact, the seven Elders all received a spiritual
vision, telling them to gather in then-remote area of the planet. It's
unclear whether the spirits were friendly or not (certain tribes
distinctly call them "dark spirits", but I suspect they don't mean a
dark rum) and when the tribes refused most of their gifts, the spirits
grew angry. During their journey back, squabbling amongst the Elders
eventually led to the First Great Tribal War. Given the name, I don't
think it was the last but as of now we have few details on any of them.

From there, we jump right through the rest of the Dark Ages to when the
Minmatar formed a global government, about 200 years before the Amarr
managed to conquer the entire planet. The Minmatar also quickly
re-entered space only about a century after the Amarr did. However, the
stargates in Pator were much better preserved than in Amarr: instead of
needing to build their own, they were able to use the ones still built,
quickly colonizing three different star systems.

Then came the Amarr. As noted, the Amarr encountered the Minmatar in
22355. For the next 125 years, the Amarr would raid Minmatar worlds for
slaves. Then, in 22480, the Day of Darkness arrived, when the Amarr
completely conquered the Matari homeworlds (amusingly, *Eve: Source*
gets this date wrong but I verified it with CCP because I am a THOROUGH
RESEARCHER and don't nobody tell me otherwise) and sent the Elders into
hiding. The Matari quickly formed their own resistance groups during the
Occupation, to varying degrees of success. This required the Amarr to
develop more and more effective means of controlling their massive slave
populations (the main modern technique, Vitoc, will be discussed in Part
4 later). Given that the Matari were the largest civilization to date to
be absorbed by the Empire, it was no surprise that they had trouble
completely maintaining order. However, they did manage to attract some
Matari to their side. Most notably, the Nefantar tribe adopted the
Amarrian religion en masse and came to be seen as the Empire's closest
allies among the tribes, (though recent evidence has come to light
showing that the Nefantar leadership acted with the blessings of the
Elders). This meant that the Amarr invested heavily in Nefantar space
(now known as the Ani constellation), and that the Nefantar reaped the
rewards. Other tribes did not fare nearly as well. Internal political
schisms within the Empire (and a few plucky rebels) eventually lead to
the annihilation of the Starkmanir homeworld. It was assumed at the time
that this led to the loss of the entire Starkmanir tribe, and is
generally seen as one of the pivotal causes of the Rebellion 250 years
later.

The end of the Occupation, as mentioned above, began after the Battle of
Vak'Atioth in 23216. The Minmatar, sensing weakness after the Amarrian's
resounding defeat, quickly seized the opportunity to throw off their
master's yoke, as well as exile the Nefantar (who eventually became
known as the Ammatar) for their role in aiding and abetting the Amarr
both prior to and during the Rebellion. Finally, over 730 years after
the Day of Darkness, the Matari claimed Pator as their own once again.
The Federation heavily supported the Matari rebels from the beginning.
Although they didn't directly intervene with military force, Gallente
materiel and support was crucial to allowing the Matari to reclaim what
they had lost and quickly establishing a working government.

Recent history has proven just as interesting for the Republic. For
obvious reasons, tensions are still high between the Republic and the
Empire. These tensions came to a head during the Elder Invasion of YC
110. The Elders were, until quite recently, taken as the mythical head
of the Minmatar prior to the Day of Darkness. They proved to be quite
real when they led a combined fleet of secretly built capital and
subcapital ships into Amarr. The Elders had withdrawn from the Tribes
withdrawn from the Tribes around the time of the Day of Darkness, biding
their time until their triumphant return, while also [keeping their
eyes](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/short-stories/theodicy/)
on the Tribes. Needless to say, they came roaring back onto the scene
during the invasion. First, they managed to completely destroy CONCORD's
rapid response capability (after [testing their abilities
first](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fCVyU4RbFEg&list=PLF614A7A6461E61E1&index=17&feature=plpp_video)),
and then invaded Amarr space. They also managed to free many
recently-discovered survivors of the Starkmanir tribe in Ammatar space
(the Ammatar's interesting background will be discussed in Part 3), and
wiped out the defensive fleets surrounding the Kor-Azor homeworld. They
would have done the same in Sarum Prime if not for the return of Empress
Jamyl and her aforementioned superweapon. Since being stopped in Sarum
Prime, however, the Elders seem to have disappeared again and have not
been in the news since.

Since the Elder Invasion, Matari society has undergone significant
upheaval. Karin Midular, former prime minister of the Republic, was
assassinated at a Gallente cultural festival. Midular [eventually
died](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/karin-midular-has-died/)
(as tends to happen in assassinations, I suppose), but more importantly,
her death served to drive a wedge between the Gallente and the Republic.
The Federation insisted on prosecuting the shooter, a Gallente national,
before extraditing him to the Republic. Though [Gerne
Broteau](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/midular-shooter-identified-appears-in-court/)
was [found
guilty](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/grene-broteau-found-guilty-on-all-counts-republic-demands-extradition/)
by Federation courts, the Republic was furious that the Federation
waited so long to turn over the shooter, and he was pretty much
summarily executed once the Republic finally got a hold of him. Since
then, a number of
[stories](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/federation-minmatar-report-widespread-discrimination/)
have come to light demonstrating that despite the Federation's
long-touted tolerance, Gallente of Minmatar origin suffer discrimination
inside Gallente space (BREAKING: humans generally dislike people who are
different from them; details at 11). With Midular gone, Sanmatar Shakor
was able to rise back into power and made significant changes to
Minmatar governance. I talk a bit about that below.

### Social Structure

The loyalties of a Minmatar are first and foremost to a one's tribe. The
tribe determines much of a person's beliefs and the rituals he or she
adheres to. Within a tribe, organization can get a bit... jumbled.
Tribes tend to break down into varieties of clans, which in turn are
comprised of various families that have similar backgrounds. Clans tend
to be a bit specialized. Another social structure in the republic is
known as one's circles, which can be thought of as a kind of workers'
guild (anyone who has read the *Wheel of Time* series can think of all
of this as very Aiel-like; I keep waiting for a reference to a
car'a'carn but it hasn't happened.... YET).

One of the key features of becoming an adult in Minmatar society is the
acquisition of a special tattoo through the ritual of Voluval. The
tattoo gained through this process is said to determine one's future,
and [certain
symbols](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/short-stories/the-ray-of-matar/)
from the ritual can mark certain people as having a great destiny or get
you exiled from the Republic.

Although they have the largest numerical population of the major races
with something like 24 trillion Matari spread across New Eden (possibly
in sardine-tin-can type conditions if *Eve: Source*'s numbers are to be
believed, but that's another discussion ENTIRELY), the Matari are very
spread out. A full 20% of Matari have emigrated to the Federation, while
almost a third of the seven tribes are still enslaved by the Amarr. Even
those that remain in the Republic are often not tied down, and vast
Thukker caravans are known to roam the Great Wildlands.

Inter-tribe tensions can also at times reach a head, especially in the
modern day. As noted above, the Republic recently received a huge influx
of Starkmanir tribesmen, and they are having trouble integrating within
the Republic, as are the Thukker tribesmen who have decided to settle
down in recent days. Furthermore, the same Elder invasion that rescued
the Starkmanir also resulted in a large number of Nefantar returning to
the homeworlds after a long absence. Given their tribe's history, they
are often shunned from the greater Republic polity, and their
integration into the Republic is ongoing.

The tribes each have different traits. The Sebestiors are valued for
their intellect and engineering prowess. The Brutors, as their name
might suggest, are among the more disciplined and militaristic of the
tribes. The Krusual are much more secretive and far more adept at the
political game. The Vherokior are prized for their social skills, and
can be found often as leaders in the business and spiritual communities.
The Thukkers, as noted above, are much more nomadic and able to rely
much more on their judgment and instinct in emergency situations. The
Nefantar and Starkmanir have only recently returned to the flock, and
other than troubles integrating have not really distinguished themselves
as of yet. *Eve: Source* delves into the various Tribes for anyone
interested in learning more. This guide is long enough as it is.

Religion and spirituality play a large role in Minmatar life as well,
though perhaps not as large of one as you might find in the Empire.
Minmatar spirituality primarily revolves around the idea that each Tribe
has its own eponymous ‘First Elder,' or spirit, that embodies the
various traits that each Tribe is known for. Each tribe appoints a
person to act as the living embodiment of the Elder, with the living
elder being responsible for maintaining the accumulated knowledge of the
tribe and helping to guide the Matari in times of trouble. There is also
a metaphysical aspect of the spirituality, as there are numerous
references to the various Elders being able to assume a "Tulraug" form
that allows the Elders, who learned the technique from the "dark
spirits" that had summoned the Elders together in the first place, that
allowed the Elders to traverse both the physical and spiritual realms.
Upon the death of an Elder, his or her spirit then merges with the
archetypal spirit of that tribe.

Matari governance has undergone significant changes in the recent past.
Although the Matari used to adhere to a Gallente-endorsed parliamentary
form of government, the Republic, led by Sanmatar Maleatu Shakor, has
changed the government to make it much more Matari in nature. Though the
tribes are now self-governing, nation-wide legislation is enacted by the
Tribal Council, which for all intents and purposes maintains complete
control over the Republic. The Sanmatar acts as head of state, and
presides over the Council, but otherwise wields few non-emergency
powers. The Republic Parliament must have pissed someone off back in the
day, as they've been reduced to a very much a rump role in the new
Republic 2.0. The Parliament now acts as a sort of drafting committee
for the Council. Whenever the Council is feeling lazy and doesn't want
to deal with a problem on its own, it can delegate the problem to the
Parliament to draft legislation, though the Council needs to approve it
first before becoming law. The Council has full power to enact, veto,
amend, spit on, curse, or otherwise override anything the Parliament
does. As I said, Parliament pissed someone off something fierce back in
the day.

### Roleplaying Tips

As might be expected, the Matari are seen mainly as the rebels,
especially against the Amarr. They're often played off as
anti-establishment, sometimes just for the sake of being
anti-establishment. Although many RPers these days choose to have some
direct connection with slavery (either by being recently escaped slaves
themselves, or the children of slaves), this is apparently changing
somewhat. Although there are still strong anti-Amarr feelings throughout
the Republic, some are choosing to play themselves as only more
distantly or abstractly aware of slavery and its Amarr connection. As
with most things in RP, of course, there's a broad spectrum of how to
play your characters and how anti-Amarr you'd like to be.

As I mentioned above, a Matari's loyalties is first and foremost to his
or her tribe in most cases. The Matari have a bit of an awkward
situation in that only 3 of the 7 tribes (the Sebestior, the Vherokior,
and the Brutors) are actually playable in game. To make up for that,
some choose to have some connection to the other tribes (the most
notable one probably being the nomadic Thukkers). Another important
aspect of a Matari identity is their tattoos (which they receive through
the Voluval ritual) and their piercings. It shouldn't be too surprising
either that they tend to be fairly friendly to the Gallente as well, but
as noted above, the relationship between the two has become rather
strained in recent months.

The Gallente Federation: Or, How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Sex, Drugs, and Rock and Roll
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If the Amarr Empire fancies itself as the moral center of New Eden, the
[Gallente
Federation](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/races/gallente/)
(for those who want to be technical (or just snobby), it's the Federated
Union of Gallente Prime) is surely the cultural one. A nation where
anything goes, as long as it makes you happy (and doesn't hurt anyone
else), the Gallente pride themselves on being at the forefront of New
Eden's culture, fashion, and philosophy. Your beloved author admits that
he finds some difficulty in describing the Gallente, if only because
they're so incredibly individualistic that outside of the fact that they
all decided to live near each other and hey maybe they vote together
sometimes too, it's remarkably difficult to find the true definition of
"Gallente" these days. That, and the ridiculous complicated
[kind-of-like-the-United-States federalism-to-the-max
government](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/races/gallente/government/)
(currently led by President Jacus Roden, of Roden Shipyards fame), but
that's another matter entirely. Suffice it to say that the Gallente
pride themselves on their freedom, their individuality, and their
ability to get basically any drugs, sex, or media that they could
possibly want at any time. I'm pretty sure that's the definition of a
devout Amarr's nightmare, which MIGHT go a long way toward explaining
why the two don't always see eye to eye. But I'm getting ahead of
myself. The Federation is made up of races from across New Eden (most
notably, many Minmatar who chose not to join the Republic, who comprise
about 1/3 of the Federation's total population), but the principal
members are the ethnic Gallente, the spiritual Intaki, the regimental
Jin-Mei, and the rather nationalistic Mannar.

### History

Gallentean history (though not known by New Eden denizens, of course)
dates back to well before the collapse of the EVE Gate. Gallente Prime,
originally known as the 6th planet in system
[VH-451](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/races/gallente/timeline/),
was purchased for settlement by French colonists from the system of Tau
Ceti (it's weird seeing a real place in New Eden history). The French
proudly carried on their history of liberty, equality, and brotherhood
through the Dark Ages. Gallente Prime itself was (and still is) a very
hospitable planet, meaning that they made it through the Dark Ages with
little to no problems.

Though some records exist of early Gallente history (which incorporates
your standard "ahh we had tribal people and we fought sometimes and
yadda yadda yadda" early history stuff), the rise of the Rouvenors is
considered by most historians to be the true beginning of Gallente
society (I'm basing that on the very reputable fact that the rise of the
Rouvenors is when the Gallente wiki starts to actually care about silly
things like dates and places). The Rouvenors arose from a small kingdom
in the middle of the continent of Garoun, from a city known as Cylle
(known in the modern day as Caille). With plentiful food and room to
grow, the Garoun Empire soon expanded across the globe. And then the
empire made what most historians consider A Mistake: They discovered
human rights and junk. People started to think that MAYBE ruling by
monarchy through one family line wasn't the smartest idea in the world.
Shortly thereafter, the empire began to collapse as states split away in
the name of self-determination. Though the empire collapsed to a mere
shadow of its former glory, it persists to this day, and the Rouvenors
are still revered as the founders and nurturers of modern liberal
philosophy.

The Gallente then entered its industrial age, which is really only
notable for the fact that the Gallente went steampunk for a little while
(yes, CCP, I totally caught that in the old wiki (RIP)). Throughout this
era, however, the planet continued to nurture this funny little idea
that government by the people was the best way to go. Anyway, the
Gallente then went full bore through the atomic and information ages,
with a brief interlude of tripolar hegemony that basically devolved into
everyone deciding that they should sing Kumbaya around the campfire and
trade instead of fighting. It should be noted that while everyone loved
one another, apparently, the entire planet was still divided into a
multitude of nations, though most shared the ideas that individuality
and democracy are pretty awesome. The most notable developments here
were two-fold: the formation of the World Democracy League (CCP's
thought process here apparently being, "Hey, what can we call the United
Nations without calling it the United Nations?"), and, near the end of
the information age (inventing the internet apparently being a thing),
the discovery that oh, hey, people live on the next planet over.

The discovery of the Caldari in 22463 AD understandably shook the
Gallente to the core. An International Space Cooperative was formed
shortly thereafter, which organized robotic probe missions to what would
soon be known as Caldari Prime. The Caldari, originally baffled by the
shiny metal things falling from the sky (they were mid-industrial age at
the time), eventually figured out that someone was going to go all ET on
them soon, and first contact occurred 54 years after the Gallente first
discovered the Caldari. And the peasants rejoiced, especially when the
Gallente started catching the Caldari up on 200 years of technological
development. Within 80 years of first contact, the two planets began
building stargates (a bit behind the Amarr due to the fact that the
gates in Luminaire were [less well
preserved](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/scientific-articles/interstellar-traveling/)).

In a turn of events that might be shocking only to people who have lived
under a rock in New Eden, however, tensions quickly arose between the
sister worlds. Given the substantial handicaps the Caldari faced on
Caldari Prime, it should be little surprise that the Caldari population
was significantly smaller than the Gallente. And then the Caldari
learned the thing that sucks in democracies: being a permanent minority.
You see, the ISC and WDL were still around, with the ISC in particular
governing colonization programs. And both operated on almost purely
democratic principles, meaning that the significantly less populous
Caldari were consistently outvoted by the significantly more populous
Gallente. Although many took this in stride, a small minority felt that
this marked the beginning of the end of Caldari culture (spoiler alert:
they don't always stay a minority). This fear was NOT helped by the
appearance of something called the Cultural Deliverance Society, which
while benign on the surface, sought to overthrow some of the more
hostile Caldari governments.

It turns out the ISC wasn't always the smartest. Despite the fact that
two groups of humans just HAPPENED to pop up on two planets in one star
system, they were completely blindsided by the concept that humans would
be found outside Luminaire: in this case, the Intaki. In a brilliant
display of ingenuity worthy of a cliché ‘80s film, the crew of the
*Sojourner* decided to go native for a year to learn about the Intaki.
They liked what they saw, and eventually, the newly formed Office for
Foreign Planetary Development sent a second ship to establish more
permanent relations with the various Intaki tribes, as well as to start
modernizing their planet. They took to this a lot better than the
Caldari did, and quickly embraced Gallente technology and ideas.

Shortly thereafter, the Luminarians (I sadly can't call them the
Federation yet and I'm left with *that* monstrosity of a name for them)
also ran into the Mannar, which were a bit farther along in the
technological development area. Although the Gallente were eager to
establish contact, they ran into a small problem: there was no planetary
government and they still had this weird thing called "war" going on
(although their predilection for near-nudity endeared them to the more
exhibitionist Gallente, they were a bit more turned off by the continued
use of human sacrifice). You see, the Mannar weren't the entire race:
they're only one nation on a planet with a multitude of them (not to
mention the biggest), and the various countries didn't particularly like
each other (slave raids will do that to a people, as the Amarr learned).
So the Gallente did what any civilized planet would do: gave technology
to the non-Mannar nations on the planet. The Gallente were shocked –
SHOCKED I SAY – to see that the other nations then used their new-found
technology to invade Mannar. For somewhat unexplained reasons, the
Gallente public still preferred the Mannar over the
non-human-sacrificing nations, and the newly-developed Sotiyo-Urbaata
drive, i.e. the warp drive we all know and love, allowed the Gallente to
impose their glorious open-mindedness on the planet, forcing peace onto
the planet.

By now, the Intaki had coalesced into a global governmental power, and
soon started joining the various Gallente-based organizations. The
Mannar ended up establishing a global hegemony on their world, and times
were just grand. Economies were booming, people were happy. It was
around this time that the Gallente elite decided that they weren't quite
rich enough. They began lobbying governments to form a new
inter-planetary organization based on the concepts of free trade (CCP
apparently deciding that it likes egging on the WTO conspiracy
theorists), and soon the Gallente-biased Multi-World Agreement on Trade
was formed. This allowed Gallente power brokers to keep control over the
new colonies popping up all over the place, as well as those pesky
Caldari. But the economies continued to boom so no one really cared.
Soon, however, after the WDL teamed up with the ICS in implementing the
MWAT while still controlling the ISC, everyone decided that the acronyms
were just getting stupid at this point. And so, in 23121, over the
reluctance of the still-pouty Caldari, the Federated Union of Gallente
Prime was born.

Originally, the Federation operated solely under the province of the
Federation Charter, which established the basic structure of the
government. At that time, the Federation acted more as a parliamentary
body than the more presidential-style government we see in action today
(whoops, there's my poli sci geekery getting the better of me). Early
Federation government was concerned with getting itself set up. Outside
of consolidating power, the biggest thing of note during the early years
was the passage of the Aclan Agreement, which required direct Senate
intervention before any Federation corporation was allowed to tamper
with a planet's ecosystem. That agreement, the hallmark of modern
environmentalism, remains in force to this day. However, the Federation
initially had major issues coordinating reactions without any way to
communicate in real time. Interstellar policy is a harsh mistress, and
the days or weeks that were needed for any official Federal response was
often fatal to Federation initiatives. It would remain this for the next
25 years, until the FTL communication was discovered by scientist Li
Azbel (I discuss the basics of the tech in the section on miscellanea).

With FTL communications, the Gallente quickly acted like the cultural
overlords that they are and established a media empire that spanned the
cluster. They quickly took over the... space...waves... (or something)
and before you know it, they'd apparently made it to the era of 24-hour
news channels that had nothing better to fill their time with than fluff
pieces and soft news stories (a little social commentary from CCP
apparently!). Anyway, it turns out that the 49th story on the plight of
the poor from Luminaire made people fed up enough to demand some basic
human rights. And so, in addition to the federal Charter, a federal
Constitution was drafted that granted basic human rights such as freedom
of expression, thought, etc.

Oh, and 23149, the Jove introduced themselves to the federal government,
but everyone kept it hush hush. With predictable results, conspiracy
theories soon flourished.

In not-surprising news, the Caldari were still pissed off. They had
started to establish secret colonies because they [resented Gallente
domination](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/gallente-caldari-war-the-early-days/).
Whoops. And those colonies were discovered. Double whoops. While this
action was technically legal, tensions rose even further on the
technicality that none of the newly discovered colonies had
representative governments as required by law. The Caldari used this to
conveniently announce that neither did they: the megacorporations now
spoke for the Caldari people. Triple whoops. Things were getting
awkward. And the best way to handle awkwardness is clearly to have an
ultra-right wing party come to power, and within days, the Senate was
demanding that the Caldari submit the colonies to federal authority and
establish democratic governments.

In response to the demand, the Caldari walked out of the Senate and the
Caldari seceded from the Federation. The Federation responded by
blockading Caldari Prime. Things stalemated from there, with each side
being frozen by not being sure just how far they really wanted to push
things. A Caldari splinter group took care of THAT little obstacle by
attacking the Gallente underwater city of Nouvelle Rouvenor, on Caldari
Prime. The attack killed 500,000 mostly Gallente citizens. Though the
Caldari State disavowed the actions, they did little to crack down on
the organizers.

As is normally the case in democracies after such a shocking attack,
backlash in the Federation was [quick and
harsh](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/gallente-caldari-war-the-breakout/).
The Ultra-Nationalists quickly took power after the attack. For the
first and only time in Federation history, the Charter and Constitution
were
[suspended](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/gallente-caldari-war-the-breakout/)
as the military imposed martial law. However, both sides were
surprisingly well matched. The Caldari couldn't break out of Caldari
Prime, while the Federation made little headway in calming the
insurrection (or dealing with protests on other worlds; martial law is a
fickle mistress). Things changed as, once again, the Caldari struck in a
surprise attack. Knowing that the Caldari would need time to fully
evacuate the planet and that the Gallente military had been severely
shaken up by the right-wing government that came to power, one Caldari
admiral set out to distract the Gallente enough to allow for an
evacuation. Starting a massive game of cat and mouse, Admiral Tovil-Toba
bought the time necessary for the Caldari megacorps to evacuate the
civilian population. Finally, when Tovil-Toba's ship was broken and
wrecked from the week spent leading the Gallente fleet on, he sent his
ship, a full-fledged carrier, crashing down onto Gallente Prime. The
ship landed on the Gallente city of Heuromont, killing over 2 million.
Admiral Tovil-Toba is revered to this day by the Caldari for his
assistance in freeing his people. If I had to guess, I'd say he wasn't
quite as well-loved on Gallente Prime.

After Heuromont, the Gallente realized that MAYBE revoking basic
liberties wasn't the way to solve a crisis that basically started by not
allowing people enough freedom. The right-wing government was swept
away, and the new president introduced significant reforms to the
Charter and Constitution. The reforms brought the current three-branch
system of government that we all know and love. Furthermore, the *de
jure* capital was moved from Gallente Prime to Villore (with the
*hideously* named Libertopolis being made the capital planet) to show
that the Gallente were not meant to dominate the Federation. Oddly
enough, they didn't quite notice that "Gallente" was in the name of the
Federation, a fact that baffles experts to this day. Anyway, the new
president, Yiona, saw to the re-establishment of the rule of law in the
Federation, and basically did her best to clean up the mess of the
ultra-right-wingers.

The Caldari war of secession continued on for a number of years, with a
few detours here and there. Despite the fact that the Hueromont attack
threw the right-wing government from power in the Federation, peace was
not yet to be found. The Gallente were just too hurt by the attack to
forgive and forget in attempts to make peace. Rather, with the Caldari
now established in their own proper space, the [war once again
came](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/gallente-caldari-war-the-war-drones-on/)
to a standstill, with neither side really gaining a permanent advantage.
The Gallente fleet was based on large, lumbering ships, so the Caldari
developed a fleet of single-man fighters. The fighters took a heavy toll
on Gallente ships, so the Gallente responded by developing the first set
of drones, an area where the Gallente lead technologically even to this
day. In response to drones, the Caldari re-invented the wheel,
apparently, by stumbling upon the idea of using frigates as anti-drone
platforms. At this point, the climactic battle of the war occurred in
Iyen-Oursta; a 15-hour slugfest that resulted in both sides being able
to say they won in some fashion. The Gallente held the system, but the
Caldari lost fewer ships. After that, the war settled into a stalemate,
and eventually ended in more of a whimper than a bang when the still-new
CONCORD negotiated a truce between the two parties in 23248 AD. The
Caldari were allowed to secede, but the Caldari in turn recognized that
maybe having your capital planet in the middle of enemy territory wasn't
the smartest thing in the world, and so they gave up their claim to
Caldari Prime (Spoiler alert: not really).

But that's not to say that the war consumed all of the Federation's
attention. Near the midpoint of the war, a Mannar exploration vessel
stumbled across the Jin-Mei. The Jin-Mei were a culture unlike others
they'd seen heretofore; despite being relatively advanced (to the point
that they were able to field basic military space vessels), they
maintained a strictly regimented, caste-based society. Despite the fact
that the Federation required all member worlds to have a democracy-based
system of government, the Jin-Mei were eventually allowed to join the
Federation and simply opt out of those pesky "equality" rules
(apparently the Federation was [Canadian
based](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Notwithstanding_clause), who knew?
Ok, seriously, I'm done with the poli sci geekery).

But by far the most notable event in the middling civil war era was the
discovery of the Amarr Empire, which ended up triggering a kind of
identity crisis for the Federation. You see, the Federation had, since
its founding, seen itself as the grand union of all humanity. It united
all people peacefully, spreading democracy and free trade through the
cluster. And then, suddenly, it wasn't the only representative of
humanity out there. Indeed, it wasn't even the *largest*. The Amarr
Empire was more populous, stronger, and practiced slavery. And it most
certainly was NOT democratic. It took a while for the Federation to
re-orient itself towards the idea that it wasn't just a grand union: it
was a government just like the other major powers (it's this
re-orientation that I think made the Gallente more willing to accept the
Caldari peace accords eventually, since the Caldari would no longer be
the only humans outside the Federation, but that's just my own pet
theory). Anyway, trade relations were eventually opened with the Empire,
and the two powers found themselves in an uneasy truce, with neither
willing to challenge each other directly.

*Indirectly*, however, the Gallente were all over it. The plight of the
enslaved Minmatar quickly became well known throughout the Federation,
and significant chunks of the electorate felt that something needed to
be done to take the yoke from their backs. And after the setback for the
Amarr at Vak'Atioth, the Gallente eagerly pitched in to help with the
new Rebellion. The advantages for the Federation were two-fold: first,
they had a genuine interest in eradicating slavery (yet couldn't commit
to a full-scale war while still at war with the Caldari). Secondly, the
Federation was eager to knock the Amarr back as a matter of morale for a
Federation that was still re-adjusting to not being the only human
government in existence. So the Gallente, along with the Jove,
coordinated supply runs to help the Rebellion. While the Federation
never officially acknowledged their role, the Federation press secretary
might as well have been actually winking at the camera whenever someone
asked about it.

As we all know at this point, the rebellion ended up succeeding. Given
the heavy support that the Federation provided, you might have expected
the newly formed Republic to join the Federation. But many saw this as
simply impractical, both because the Federation could not afford the
massive reconstruction effort (either in money or in manpower... that
whole "Caldari War" thing was still going, you know) and they didn't
want to risk antagonizing the Amarr more than they already had. So while
the Federation and Republic grew to be close allies, they remained
distinct governments.

As the Caldari War dragged on, more and more of the younger generations
began clamoring for peace. They had not been around for the horrors of
Hueromont and Nouvelle Rouvenor; they just wanted this war to be over
with. In fact, they wanted all war to be over with. The Federation had
originally been formed to allow all humanity to air its grievances in a
civilized fashion... if the Federation itself had failed in this task,
might a new organization succeed better? The leader of the movement was
a young Senator (and later, Federation President) named Aidonis Elabon.
The fruits of his labor, of course, was CONCORD, and he somehow managed
to get all the empires to sign on to the idea. Capsuleers and pirates
have retroactively cursed his name ever since.

Since then, the Gallente have actually had few notable incidents (at
least, incidents that aren't covered elsewhere in this guide). A [few
flare-ups](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/short-stories/theodicy/)
with the Amarr occurred, as did a few attempts to set up permanent
collaborations with the Caldari (the most notable being the ill-fated
Crielere Project), neither of which resulted in anything particularly
major (unless you count, you know, cloaking devices as major). However,
tensions came to a head again with the Caldari in YC 110. The Gallente,
upon invitation to talks with the Ishukone megacorporation, sent one of
their most-respected naval officers as representative to Malkalen. The
naval officer ended up going rogue, and [crashing his Nyx-class
supercarrier into the
station](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uSHdIsIOrsc), killing 420,000 as
well as Ishukone's CEO (The novel *Empyrean Age* clarifies that a person
known as the Broker had actually replaced the admiral to sabotage his
reputation before killing him, but of course this is not known in an IC
context). This acted as the catalyst needed to restart the
Caldari-Gallente war.

Perhaps the most notable development in recent times for the Gallente
are the steps the government has taken to crack down on civil liberties
in some areas. President Foiritan's first major step in that direction
was the very [public
execution](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/two-deaths/)
of a Gallente defector, Admiral Eturrer, in full view of the public. The
President also saw the creation of the Black Eagles, headed by former
political rival Mentas Blaque, as a secret policing branch of the
government, overseeing internal surveillance as well as acting as the
secret ops branch of military intelligence. President Roden has seen no
need to interfere with the Eagles since coming to office in YC 111.
President Roden was reelected in early YC 117 for a second term in
office, but things have been fairly quiet on the Gallente front for
quite a while. Which probably means that Roden is also a thrall of the
Other and will cackle maniacally when the entirety of the Federation
gets wiped out but we'll save that development for another Guide update.

### Social Structure

As you might have guessed from the introduction, the [Federation
government](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/races/gallente/government/)
should be familiar to any student of American government (I know I
promised the poli sci geekery would end, but like most politicians, I
LIED). You have the standard three branches (though the wiki (RIP)
somewhat adorably added the bureaucracy as a fourth branch) – executive
(headed by the Federation President), legislative (the unicameral
Senate, with 903 members from 62 districts), and judicial (headed by the
Supreme Court) – all of whom serve to check and balance each other to
prevent any one branch from aggregating too much power. Each district
(usually, a constellation) has its own district parliament that serves
in an advisory capacity. Below THAT are the various member states. These
are not just states in the American sense, however. These are fully
fledged nations, perhaps more similar to the European Union. The federal
government primarily concerns itself with free trade, peaceful expansion
for member states, and promotion of democratic governance.

Additionally, the Federation Constitution guarantees a variety of rights
such as freedom of expression, equality before the law, and the right to
human dignity. Anything that isn't explicitly laid out in the Federation
Charter or Constitution are left to the member states to sort out.
Additionally, certain governments (notably, the Jin-Mei) are granted the
power to opt out of certain provisions of federal law (rights? We don't
need no stinkin' human rights).

Culturally speaking, the Gallente are just as varied as a society based
on the celebration of the individual would suggest. The Gallente love
for finer aspects of life are well-earned; the Gallente are well known
for their food, fashion, and ability to have a good time. And given that
the Federation is the melting pot of the Cluster, it shouldn't surprise
you to learn that it's rather difficult to classify anyone based on
their racial backgrounds. Not only have almost all of the various races
in New Eden found their way to the Federation at this point, but they've
also interbred to a significant degree. Those looking to classify
Gallente citizens in ANY way are more likely to find success by looking
at a person's ideology than their racial background. Indeed, that is the
biggest identifier of the various voter blocs in Gallente politics
(along with an odd, but appreciated, obsession with bird names for the
various blocs).

That being said, there are a few primary ethnic groups to be found in
the Federation. The ethnic Gallente take the stereotypical Federation
love of all things individual and liberty to the extreme. Beyond them
are the Mannar, who rival the ethnic Gallente rival the ethnic Gallente
when it comes to fashion expertise and trend setting, but are also known
for their fierce nationalism and determination. They were the primary
source of recruits in the Caldari civil war. The Jin-Mei are a bit of an
outlier. In a nation that is renowned for its dedication to democracy
and equality, the Jin-Mei maintain a strict caste-based system. Although
the caste system, under the agreements that the Jin-Mei made when it
ascended to Federation membership, is not allowed outside of the
Lirsautton system, the system still operates in full force within
Jin-Mei society due to Federation concessions. Oh, and then there's the
Intaki. But they're special enough to warrant an entire section (and NOT
just because my character happens to be one).

### Roleplaying Tips

As you could probably guess, the Gallente like to, shall we say, "party
hard." They are known for their, well, sex, drugs, and rock and roll,
and most Gallente are proud of that fact. They also tend to be the most
idealistic of the four races, frowning mightily from their ivory towers
on the Amarr for their slave-holding ways and the Caldari for their
unenlightened secession and subsequent war. They even can (though by no
means do all people do this) look a patronizingly on the Minmatar.
Haughty might even be an appropriate term for the "stereotypical
Gallente," and it's an oft-repeated criticism of the Gallente that they
believe their culture is the best and wish to gobble up all the others.
Gallente by nature tend to be nosy and opinionated, and while their
desire to "civilize" or "uplift" societies to Gallente standards may
stem from good intentions (most of the time), it's backfired enough
times to be clear that it's not always the right answer. But that
doesn't stop people from trying anyway. Many RPers tend to have a pet
cause or causes to get worked up about. Gallente can also be the rather
stereotypical hippies; indeed, there's a large environmental movement,
hints of which can be seen in the Gallente COSMOS constellation in
Algintal. Oh, and I should mention that there is a rather vibrant Intaki
secession movement in some parts of the RP community. Some feel that the
Intaki get short shrift (especially since Intaki Prime, the homeworld,
is in the faction warfare zone between Caldari and Federation space and
actually sat in Caldari hands for a good chunk of time back in the day),
and would be better off striking out on their own. This is a continuing
debate though, and I don't believe there's a clear majority one way or
another.

The Caldari State: Nothing Says Love Like a Giant and Soulless Megacorporation
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If it's difficult to describe the Minmatar without referring to the
Amarr, it is impossible to describe the [Caldari
State](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/races/caldari/) without
describing the massive impact the Gallente Federation has had on it.
Having developed in the same system as the Gallente, the State was born
in blood and fire (ironic considering that Caldari Prime is a ball of
ice), through their determination to not be governed by anyone. Any
description of the Caldari as a people have to start and end with the
concept of megacorporations: gargantuan corporate entities that control
a person's life from cradle to grave. A person lives and dies by the
grace of his corporate masters. In some respects, though, this has lead
to an even more egalitarian society than even the Gallente: the harsh
realities of darwinian economics and corporate bottom lines have made
the State an almost ideal version of a meritocracy, where anyone can
make it far if they have the talent and are willing to work at it.
Although there have been some attempts to centralize authority in the
State in the recent past, the eight megacorporations still firmly
control the levers of power within Caldari borders.

### History

The early history of the State has made a lasting impact on the Caldari,
moreso than the other races. The planet that would eventually be known
as Caldari Prime was purchased by a megacorporation in
[7989](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/races/caldari/timeline/).
Caldari Prime, unlike its sister Gallente Prime, was a harsh and cold
world. Indeed, heavy terraforming would be needed to make it habitable,
and the terraforming had only just begun when the EVE Gate collapsed. It
would take another 250 years before the surface was habitable, and even
then the air was thin and the soil fairly barren. Despite the harshness
of the only minimally terraformed world, the Caldari managed to eke out
an existence in the temperate regions near the equator. This harsh
history ultimately lead to the Caldari's well-known utilitarianism, and
profound belief in the idea that the needs of the many outweigh the
needs of the few (making Spock proud in the process). The Caldari didn't
care how pretty something looked, it would kill you all the same if it
didn't do something to help the people survive. Though they were never
particularly centralized, the most notable of the nations that manage to
rise on this cold and dreary world was the Raata Empire, which united
the Tikiona continent in 17453 AD. The Empire survived for over 3,500
years before collapsing in 20998 AD. The myriad smaller states that
followed in the Empire's wake eventually ended up organizing primarily
around ethnic lines, with little cross-ethnic mingling.

This was essentially the state that the Caldari were in when first
contact was made with the Gallente. I should probably note here that the
term "Caldari" wasn't really in use prior to first contact with the
Gallente (so sorry for lying to you above!). Rather, the term came into
use to distinguish the two homeworlds in Luminaire. I should also note
that the evolution from traditional government to corporatocracy remains
largely unexplored; frankly, CCP has never really delved into the
subject in-depth (ironically, or perhaps fittingly, what little
exploration into the subject is done through Gallente wiki (RIP)
entries). It's implied at times that the old government was too
Gallente-friendly, and that it was only the megacorporations – strangled
by Gallente interests – that were willing to take a stand. But just how
the megacorporations seized control, and the resulting culture shocks
that reverberated throughout Caldari society, remain one of the great
unexplored mysteries in Eve.

Anyway, rather than rehashing the history of the Gallente-Caldari War
again, I only want to touch on a few things about the impetus for the
war from the Caldari's perspective. To understand the desire to secede,
one has to understand that the Gallente were seen as, for lack of a
better word, rather meddling. Almost from the beginning, the Gallente
seemed to enjoy lording their sophistication over the Caldari, a culture
that prided itself on its self-sufficiency, perhaps best epitomized
through the fact that something called the ‘Cultural Deliverance
Society' existed in the first place (though, fittingly, the CDS did
introduce the concept of "corporations" to the Caldari in the first
place... maybe Star Trek is something is on to something with that whole
‘Prime Directive' nonsense...). Although information on the Society is
somewhat sparse, given the name it wouldn't be a stretch of the
imagination to say that it probably had the purpose of "civilizing" the
Caldari. From there, the situation continued to worsen as the Gallente
dragged the Caldari (essentially kicking and screaming) through the
formation of the Federation. By then, the megacorporations had begun to
assert themselves as the primary governing body of the Caldari, and they
did not appreciate the regulations and rules the Federation put in place
on them, again bumping up against that Caldari pride in
self-sufficiency. It seemed that everywhere they turned, the Federation
was ready to gobble them up. The Federation trying to assert
jurisdiction over the hidden colonies was simply the straw that broke
the camel's back, and things spiraled from there. Meddling led to anger
which lead to Nouvelle Rouvenor which lead to the blockade which lead to
Hueromont. Neither party and both parties are at fault for the lead up
to the war; it was just a situation where societies just don't mesh well
with one another.

More recent history has been rather eventful for the Caldari. Starting
in YC 110, a worker named Tibus Heth rose to national prominence after
rising quickly from factory worker to CEO of Caldari Constructions.
After the aforementioned Malkalen incident, Tibus was able to use the
nationalist fervor to get himself appointed head of the newly formed
Caldari Providence Directorate, essentially taking direct command over
much of the Caldari State. This was an unprecedented consolidation of
power when the megacorporations were known to have almost unilateral
authority in many areas. Heth changed this dynamic, getting de facto
dictatorial powers over much of the State. He used these powers to,
among other things, gear up for another war with the Gallente and, more
benevolently, re-establish the meritocracy that some felt had gotten
lost in recent years.

After taking power, Heth was able to leverage the Elder fleet invasion
to his own advantage. In a daring lightning strike, Heth used the
failure of CONCORD's rapid response capabilities (and with helpfrom
Admiral Eturrur, who sabotaged the Federation's early warning systems)
to sweep through
[Algogille](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2010/03/02/algogille-graveyard/)
(the headquarters of the Federation Navy) and
[Luminaire](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2010/03/07/luminaire-graveyard/)
to retake control of Caldari Prime. President Foiritan had little choice
but to cede the planet back to the Caldari after he found Luminaire
blockaded and 20 million troops landed on the surface of Caldari Prime.
The Caldari quickly took control of the planet and showed the flag by
leaving *Shiigeru*, a [Leviathan-class
titan](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2010/03/13/luminaire-titan-2/), in
orbit of the planet. This titan was eventually brought down in rather
spectacular fashion, [leaving nothing but smoldering
ruins](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2013/04/14/operation-highlander-battleground/),
and a demilitarized Caldari Prime.

After losing *Shiigeru*, Heth reacted to the devastating strategic loss
of leverage over the Gallente with poise and aplomb by immediately
forcing Admiral Yanala, the capsuleer commanding the ship, to [commit
ritualistic
suicide](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/breaking-news-yanala-forced-into-tea-maker-ceremony/).
You know, as galactic leaders do.

Once the news of this broke, Heth's reign quickly spiraled downwards.
Most of the Caldari mega-corporations had grown tired of Heth's
centralization, and yearned for a return to the prior status quo. The
news of the Tea Maker Ceremony (leave it to the Caldari to make
ritualistic suicide sound like an afternoon with grandma) was the
impetus the megacorps needed to boot Heth. Within a few days, Heth was
on the run. First, he and his remaining followers [seized
control](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/breaking-news-provists-seize-haatamo-station-tibus-heth-leading/)
of a station in Haatomo. Since you can't exactly have the ostensible
leader of your nation laying siege to your own stations, the Caldari
Executive Panel [denounced
Heth](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/breaking-news-tibus-heth-denounced-by-cep-to-be-ousted-as-kk-ceo/)
and went so far as to [eliminate the position of State
Executor](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/cep-dissolves-state-executor-position-provists/).
He was removed as CEO of Caldari Construction, and there are now
[warrants out for his
arrest](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/cep-kk-call-for-heths-arrest/).
Although Heth's whereabouts are technically unknown, it seems likely
that he died in an assault when his fleet was assaulted by unknown
craft. [Its remains were found in
Aivonen](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/report-wreckage-of-heths-escort-found-in-aivonen/),
where only his bloody wrist watch was recovered. Which, frankly, was
probably the least painful way for him to die considering that his lungs
are slowly turning into lumps of coal. For those keeping score at home,
this means we've had a Caldari dictator pursued and probably killed by
his own mutinous forces, a Minmatar former prime minister assassinated
at a cultural festival, and an Amarr Empress assassinated by Drifters.
RUN AWAY, PRESIDENT RODEN, RUN AWAY.

### Social Structure

A person's daily life in the State begins and ends with one of the eight
[megacorporations](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/races/caldari/corporate/):
Sukuuvesta, Nugoeihuvi, CBD, Ishukone, Hyasyoda, Kaalakiota, Wiyrkomi,
and Lai Dai. These megacorps, through a nightmarish maze of
subsidiaries, affiliates, and other corporate mumbo jumbo, own something
like 90% of all property within the State. Although the corporations
each have their own agendas and ideologies, they generally fall into one
of three philosophical blocs: the Practicals (consisting of Sukuuvesta,
Nugoeihuvi, and CBD, whom are generally the most exploitative and the
most supportive of Heth), the Liberals (Ishukone and Hyasyoda, whom
generally are the most supportive of free trade and cordial relations
with other nations), and the Patriots (consisting of Kaalakiota,
Wiyrkomi, and Lai Dai. This faction is by far the most powerful, and
advocates putting Caldari interests above all else; they're known for
their fierce nationalism). A fourth faction, the Provists, had risen as
Heth's primary power bloc before he, umm, went crazy. Needless to say,
they're pretty much out of the picture with Heth's downfall, though he
still has loyalists scattered throughout the State. However, all the
blocs tend to be united by a martial pride; although it is the smallest
of the four empires, the State often leads in military technology and
strategy, allowing them to stay on par with the other empires.

Traditionally, like the Matari tribes, the corporations are given
extensive leeway to conduct their own business and affairs as they saw
fit. Individual megacorporations run their own schools, have their own
currencies (indeed, the Caldari financial system is so complex as
warrant [complex
explanations](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/caldari-funds-unlimited/)
of their financial system), and their own justice systems. Each megacorp
even has their own police force and military. A contract between
megacorporations is considered almost sacred: only the quasi-judicial
Caldari Business Tribunal has authority to cancel contracts. The CBT
isn't a traditional Supreme Court, however. It's only meant to settle
disputes between the megacorps, even if they have extensive powers at
their disposal to do so. For most traditional crimes and legal appeals,
the megacorporation's own justice system is the first and last stop. Any
executive action is exercised jointly by the megacorps through the Chief
Executive Panel, with each megacorp having a seat at the table. The CEP
is what sets the national budget as well as runs the State's military
apparatus (not to be confused with the individual corporate militaries).

Heth had attempted to centralize power in the State and remove much of
freedom to act that the megacorps had previously enjoyed. For quite a
while, the CEP was reduced to essentially a rubber stamp, blindly
approving any and all of Heth's reforms with minimal modification, given
his popularity with the Caldari masses. The one true outlier in the new
system was Ishukone. Prior to former CEO Otro Gariushi's death, Ishukone
was the leading corporation pushing for peace with the other Empires.
They even managed to develop an antidote for Vitoc (explained in the
section on miscellanea, but essentially the drug the Amarr use to help
control slaves) which they were willing to give to the Minmatar. Even
after Gariushi's death, his replacement as CEO refused to be cowed by
Heth (as detailed in *Templar One*). With Heth out of the picture,
however, the previous status quo is quickly reasserting itself.

Bloodlines tend to play an odd role within the State. Although
meritocratic in nature much of the time, an odd strain of racial purity
runs through some aspects of the corporate Caldari culture; indeed, one
of the factors that controls whom a Caldari may marry (as determined by
the aforementioned corporate overlords) is similarity in physical
appearance. The megacorps are trying to maintain the Caldari ‘look'
across the generations. As such, a look at the various bloodlines is a
necessity. First there is the Deteis, who are seen as hard-working and
efficient. Often the face of Caldari leadership, they truly believe in
society-above-self. The Civire tend to be quick thinkers, and handle
themselves well under pressure. They seem to genuinely enjoy being
constantly busy, and they always strive for excellence. Finally, and as
a bit of an outlier, we have the Achura. Unlike the Deteis and the
Civire, the Achura were not a founding member of the State, but were
absorbed about 300 years ago, and they followed the Caldari in their
secession from the Federation. Spirituality appears to feature more
prominently in Achura life, but unfortunately the details of the main
religion appear scant in the literature. Suffice it to say that the
Achura are more introverted than the others, but more renowned for their
intelligence.

### Roleplaying Tips

The Caldari are probably best known for being fiercely nationalistic,
and proud both of their state and their parent corporation. Given that
the corporation has essentially raised their members since birth, their
views on various affairs are likely to closely match their parent
corporation when it comes to foreign affairs or Tibus Heth. The Caldari
are also fiercely proud of their meritocratic system, and tend to look
harshly upon slackers or those who do not pull their weight. Although
clearly highly disciplined, the Caldari, like everyone, need to let off
steam now and then, and the State enjoys a thriving gambling and sport
culture. Finally, they tend to be fairly utilitarian, caring little for
how something looks if it's able to get the job done. They tend to
mirror the Amarrian's view of their alliance: it's more one of
convenience than of any particular ideological similarities, as is their
view of the Minmatar. Obviously, their hatred for most things Gallente
can be well-explained given their history.

CONCORD: Policeman of the Skies
-------------------------------

[CONCORD](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/concord/),
short for CONsolidated COoperation and Relations commanD (they were
stretching a bit, but frankly let's just be glad that the Amarr didn't
somehow name it AMARR), was originally the brainchild of a young
Gallente senator named Aidonis Elabon, with heavy and discreet backing
from the Jove. Devised as a way for the empires to maintain the peace,
CONCORD was given broad authority over many interstellar affairs.
CONCORD is charged with maintaining the status quo between the various
empires. Perhaps the most useful tool in CONCORD's possession in the
pursuit of this mandate is Directive [Alpha-Gamma
12](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/eve-online-news/concord-releases-core-complexion-technology/),
which allows CONCORD to seize any technology that could alter the
strategic balance, and auction it off to the highest bidder in each of
the other three empires (AG 12 strikes again, though not by name, in
*Templar One* with the newly developed mercenary technology). CONCORD's
secondary mission is to keep us rambunctious capsuleers in check. To
that extent, the Jove have equipped CONCORD ships with specialized
weaponry that prove far more deadly to capsuleer vessels than they do to
regular vessels. Their specialized weaponry keeps pod pilots in check
(at least theoretically), while also keeping CONCORD from growing too
big for its britches, so to speak.

Originally formed in 23233, no one was originally sure what CONCORD
would do with its new found powers. It took a while for it to get into
its stride. Indeed, it wasn't until 15 years later, when it negotiated
the end of the Caldari-Gallente War, that anyone really took it
seriously. From there, it slowly grew its base of support, and today it
is self-sufficient from the taxes it earns from capsuleer transactions
(those wonderful sales taxes we must all pay) and other revenue. Indeed,
CONCORD no longer needs to rely at all on the empires for financial
support, and it has used this newfound independence to advance its own
agenda independent of the empires. Indeed, in recent years they have
taken an almost-hostile view to capsuleers, and have a well -known love
of secrecy. In one notable example, after the corpse of Dr. Tukoss, a
leading researcher into the Sleepers, was discovered, CONCORD placed a
[50 PLEX bounty on the capsuleer holding the
corpse](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/capsuleers-refuse-tukoss-handover-situation-intensifies/),
as well as a threatened reduction in security status, before it was
turned over. CONCORD's ultimate ends are no longer entirely clear,
which, you know, probably bodes well.

CONCORD is headed by the Inner Circle, consisting of a delegate from
each nation and the four highers-up from within in CONCORD itself, which
controls the development and implementation of all CONCORD policy. The
Inner Circle appears to hold significant sovereignty over the empires:
after the YC 110 attacks, the various empires were unable to form
capsuleer-controlled militias until CONCORD
[passed](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-dark-end-of-space/)
the Emergency Militia War Powers Act. The astute amongst you may notice
that with 5 member empires and 4 CONCORD lackeys, the Empires can, when
they get their acts together, still order CONCORD around. Which works
well enough when all 5 member nations are, you know, existent and not
withering away and unable to appoint an ambassador. But, as we learn in
[That
Chronicle](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/inheritance/)
(which, hey, give me some credit, hasn't been mentioned in like 30
pages), the rump Jovian government, such as it was, did manage to
realize that maybe this wasn't the best state of affairs and appointed
official heirs to the Jovian legacy; a seat on the Inner Circle and all.
The Society of Conscious Thought, a sect of schools spread throughout
the Cluster but originally created by Jovian thinkers, was appointed to
the Jove's seat on the Circle in a rather goosebump-raising scene (if I
do say so myself) at the end of the chronicle.

Below the Inner Circle, CONCORD breaks down into a number of divisions.
The most well-known to the capsuleers would be the Directive Enforcement
Division: they're the ones who blow you up when committing a CONCORDable
offense in space, acting as the policemen of the stars and protecting
many a pilot in high security space (I know, I know CONCORD doesn't
protect, it punishes, yadda yadda yadda). They have special tools and
weapons from the Jove that only affect capsuleer ships. The other agency
that we capsuleers have the most direct interaction with is the Secure
Commerce Commission: they're the ones that take your taxes and regulate
trade between the empires. CONCORD also includes the [Communication
Relay
Committee](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-communication-relay-committee/)
as well as various
[ISD](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/isd-interstellar-services-department-a-department-of-concord/)
[and](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/star-support-technology-and-resources-a-division-of-concord/)
CCP technical
[support](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/aurora-auxiliary-union-for-rallying-observation-recording-analysisa-division-of-concord/)
sides in an attempt to explain things in-game.

Frontier Organizations: Minor Powers, Mighty Aspirations
========================================================

For most video game companies, the four major empires, with their
expansive backstories, would have been quite enough for their content
teams. They could rest on their laurels for a job well done and some
information to put in their tiny instruction manuals (remember back in
the day when they gave a ton of background? I miss that), and carry on
with their lives. Fortunately for us canon geeks, CCP is NOT like most
video game companies. Beyond the four major empires, the Jove, and
CONCORD, there are a rich number of smaller factions that, while you
can't necessarily play them as a bloodline, fill in more of the tapestry
of New Eden (and let people get their yarr on in quite a few different
ways). I won't be spending nearly as much time on these smaller powers
as I did for the major empires, but each of these have their own unique
storylines that deserve at least some mention.

Ammatar Mandate
---------------

I've mentioned the
[Ammatar](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-ammatars/)
before in the sections on the Amarr and Minmatar. Originally known as
the Nefantar tribe, they were the only Minmatar tribe to accept the
Amarr invasion with something like open arms. Indeed, this was something
of a political decision made by the heads of the tribe (with the
agreement of the Elders) to ensure the Nefantar's survival (and, it was
hoped, to send intelligence on the Amarr to the other tribes).
Eventually, the rest of the tribe came to embrace the Amarr way of life,
including their religion. The Amarr, eager to promote such views,
lavished money and
[gifts](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2012/01/29/the-reactor-factory/)
on the tribe in their home constellation of Ani, while savaging the
tribes who were less, shall we say, multicultural in that respect. The
contemporary Amarr emperor even granted the Nefantar limited autonomy
over Ani. This led to a somewhat inevitable schism between it and the
rest of the tribes.

But all was not well between the Amarr and the Nefantar, at least in the
higher levels. The largest break came when the Amarr bombarded Starkman
Prime into ash. Even the Nefantar couldn't take such a direct assault on
one of the Tribes. And so they began one of the greatest cover ups in
New Eden history. Almost all known Starkmanir slaves were transferred to
Nefantar authority through either forged documents or coercion, hiding
the remnants of the tribe in plain sight. It was by no means a perfect
solution, but it was the best possible under the circumstances. But, of
course, the Nefantar leadership couldn't exactly brag about their
accomplishment. Although they had the blessings of the Minmatar Elders,
one of the greatest rescue missions in known history had to remain a
secret for hundreds of years. The Ammatar leadership now claim that
rescuing the Starkmanir and giving intelligence to the other tribes were
their primary reason for siding with the Amarr during the Rebellion, but
given the strength of pro-Amarr feelings even prior to the Starkman
apocalypse, that explanation has a bit of a "revisionist history" feel
to it.

During those hundreds of years, of course, the rest of the tribes
rebelled and pushed out the Amarr from their space, along with their
apparent lackeys, the Nefantar. The Amarr, in consideration of the
support received even during the Rebellion, granted the wayward tribe
some space (conveniently, and completely coincidentally I'm sure,
located to act as a buffer zone between the newfound Republic and the
Empire) and set up the semi-autonomous Ammatar Mandate. The Mandate has
its own nominal Amarrian governor (currently the Heir Yonis Ardishapur)
and its fleet is under the control of the Empire, but they also have
several direct links to Jamyl's the Imperial Court to ensure Ammatar
concerns are heard.

As noted, the Ammatar's hiding of the Starkmanir came to light only in
the past few years. During the Elder Fleet Invasion of YC 110, the
Elders made a stop in the Mandate to pick up most of the Starkman
survivors as well as any Nefantar who wanted to return to the Republic.
Even the head of the Mandate encouraged the Ammatar to return. Today,
the Mandate still stands in a bit of a state of shock as it tries to
regain its footing. After the previous Mandate governor resigned to
return to the Republic, Empress Jamyl placed the Mandate under the
stewardship of Heir Yonis Ardishapur, mostly as a political move in
hopes of distracting him from problems with the Empress's leadership.
Although many Nefantar decided to return, the Mandate itself survives
and many have chosen to remain under Empire protection.

Angel Cartel
------------

One of the more established of the pirate factions, the Angel Cartel's
main base of operations is in the Curse region, though they seem to have
tendrils just about everywhere. Little is known about their history or
structure, other than that there are four main divisions of the Cartel:
the Dominations (the command branch of the Cartel), the Archangels (the
main combat arm of the Cartel), the Guardian Angels (whose sole purpose
appears to be guarding Serpentis assets), and the Salvation Angels
(maintenance and repair division) and that the hierarchy is pretty
strictly adhered to. The leading theory on the Cartel's origins is that
they originally formed from a loose conglomerate of pirate groups in or
slightly before YC 4, but frankly that's a boring theory and I would
prefer to think that pirate space kittens have something to do with it.

The Cartel has extensive holdings throughout the Empires, but mainly
focus on the Minmatar regions, where they gain most of their recruits.
Many Matari that join are disaffected by the Republic, but recent
changes (most notably the recovery of the Starkmanir and the Elder Fleet
invasion) have noticeably slowed recruitment efforts. Still, this hasn't
yet seemed to harm Angel holdings, which include significant control
over the Caldari "grey market" (bringing in illegal, competing products
to the megacorporation's own enclaves). They've also been known to work
with the Sisters of EVE (described below) in humanitarian missions (per
*The Burning Life*). There are even some rumors saying that they've
managed to acquire examples of Jove technology to integrate into their
ships, but for obvious reasons the Dominations haven't chosen to divulge
that information. Given the fact that Curse is the home of the First and
Second Jovian Empire, however, such rumors may not be all that far
off-base.

Blood Raider Covenant
---------------------

It might surprise you to know that there is an even darker side to an
already dark religion that allows and even encourages slavery of
sentient beings. An offshoot of the mainstream Amarr religion dating
back to the pre-space-flight days, the Sani Sabik (some call it a
religion of its own, others call it a cult) agree with the main religion
that some people are born great, while others must serve those born to
greatness. Where the Sani Sabik differ, however, is the use of blood in
many of their rituals in order to obtain either physical or spiritual
immortality. Rituals vary from sect to sect, but the more "mainstream"
portions of the religion tend to use blood donated willingly by its own
members. Other portions believe that only blood taken from the [unclean
and](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/half-a-life/)
[unperfected](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/half-a-life/)
will do. The Sani Sabik have been exiled a number of times from Amarr
space (one such exile apparently leading to the creation of the Takmahl,
so think about THAT next time you're in Araz), but like any good pest,
the Empire seems incapable of eradicating them completely.

The more militaristic of this subset of a subset of a minority join the
[Blood Raider
Covenant](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-blood-raiders/),
though I'll note that Source uses Sani Sabik and the Raiders fairly
interchangeably (and dives into other considerations quite a bit more).
These raiders ply the spacelanes, mostly focused on getting the blood of
capsuleers (though they will not turn down a passing unarmed ship) for
their rituals. This, oddly, is actually a step up, as before the advent
of capsuleers, the Raiders focused primarily on children as their
targets. The Covenant, and the Sani Sabik in general, have long had
friends in the upper levels of the Amarr imperial court. Most recently,
former Court Chamberlain Dochuta Karsoth scandalized Amarr Prime when,
after the Elder Fleet invaded, he ran to the Covenant for protection. [A
long history of collusion was
discovered](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/of-god-and-her-beast/),
and Karsoth was eventually captured and [executed on Empress Jamyl's
order](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/two-deaths/).
Since then, the Covenant has been set back on its heels a bit, but the
Covenant and the Sani Sabik sect continue to have small, but significant
support throughout the Empire. It probably shouldn't surprise anyone
that the Covenant excels at the bio-sciences and human anatomy. There
are also some suggestions that the Covenant excels at selective breeding
and other metabolic manipulation, leading to very robust and physically
fit soldiers.

The Covenant is currently run by the person responsible for its recent
rise in power and sophistication: Omir Sarikusa. Around him are a close
inner circle of theological and legal advisors, mostly given the ominous
title of "Bleeders."

Drifters
--------

For the first time in quite a while, New Eden has a new faction! The
Drifters (not to be confused with the Vherokior ancestry of the same
name) have exploded onto the scene in the latest story arc, appearing in
New Eden at the same time various [unidentified
wormholes](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2015/03/08/unidentified-wormholes/)
(different from the normal wormholes capsuleers use daily) popped up
around the Cluster. We know little of their history or relation to
anyone else, outside of the fact that they seem to sometimes be working
in league with the Seekers and like to dismantle the Jove observatories
to steal their juicy secrets. The Drifters are a bit weird in that they
apparently realized that resistance was futile and went straight-up
Borg. With heavy cybernetic enhancements covering just about their
entire body, they seem almost more machine than man. Somewhat more
worryingly, the Drifters have Jove-level technology at their disposal
and aren't afraid to use it, and have been known to attack anyone who
gets too close to the [unidentified
wormholes](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2015/03/08/unidentified-wormholes/)
or [Jove
observatories](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2015/03/22/unidentified-structures-uncloaked/),
formerly marked as unidentified structures, while they are around.

Drifter ships are incredibly advanced compared to your more orthodox New
Eden ships, but (unlike CONCORD) they ARE beatable. Beyond some fancy
schmancy non-Newtonian propulsion systems, they have two layers of
shielding, a device that allows them to always break sensor lock, and
did I mention a superweapon capable of downing capital ships? I wasn't
kidding when I said they went all Borg on us. They also seem to have a
thing for cloning. Unlike most NPC vessels, the game shows Drifter
battleships having one of two Drifter pilots: either Apollo (the Greek
god of archery) or Artemis (the Greek goddess of hunting) Tyrannos
(which means, uhh, tyrant, and what

I'm trying to say is that these names DON'T REALLY BODE WELL FOR US,
OK). A third pilot, Hikanta Tyrannos, has been found hanging out near
[Drifter
Hives](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2015/06/19/drifter-complexes-barbican-conflux-redoubt-sentinel-vidette/).
None of these pilots have deigned to converse with us lowly capsuleers
yet, at least not [outside of
twitter](https://twitter.com/apollotyrannos). It's been shown in a
[recent game trailer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s3060a8NkOk) that
the Drifters appear to be forged out of the bodies of dead clones of
capsuleers, brought back to life through advanced technology. I guess
that makes them even more zombified Borg than the regular Borg zombies.
They are also known to scoop up corpses of those they pod, making them
even MORE spooky (possibly... 3 spookeh?!).

If anything, they've become even MORE brazen since their introduction.
At first, it started off cute when they showed up to [stop a press
conference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8cx8Ac44RL4) on the results
of an autopsy of a Drifter corpse. Then they showed up to [show their
displeasure](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AXBFbCtjkAg) with the Amarr
navy. Finally, they [blew
up](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=46aRYr0IZi0) Jamyl's ship and pod
before anyone could respond. They could probably use some anger
management, I'm just saying.

That being said, the
[You-Know-What](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/inheritance/)
was surprisingly vague on just who the Drifters are working for and what
their ultimate end goals are, given the clarity it gave us on some of
the other outstanding questions. Who they're working for, what their
ultimate goals are, and whether they're ultimately going to help or
hinder us capsuleers are all up very much for debate, and as you might
imagine, theories are running rampant even after the release of That
Story.

Equilibrium of Mankind
----------------------

A minor player in a host of minor players, the Equilibrium of Mankind
nonetheless has a notable role-playing contingent, as well as a
surprisingly well-developed backstory. The order, like the Blood Raider
Covenant, is a split off sect of the Amarr religion. The sect was
started by Ocilan Ardishapur, the brother to the Ardishapur Heir at the
time. Ocilan's sect split off about 2,000 years ago, however, when
ancient texts were discovered. These texts had a profound effect on
Ocilan. The texts spoke of the downfall and doom of humanity should it
decide to remain where God has forbidden it (meaning New Eden, of
course). Only those who help to reconstruct the "pathway to Heaven" can
be saved from God's wrath, as this was the only path to salvation. The
texts were quickly declared apocryphal by the main Amarr church (the
irony, of course, being that this probably refers to the destruction
that befell New Eden after the collapse of EVE Gate and an attempt to
rally people to reconstruct the gateway home), but Ocilan (a wealthy and
charismatic fellow) managed to gather a substantial following, calling
itself the Equilibrium of Mankind. The main Church, worried at his surge
of popularity and uncomfortable with his message, exiled him from
Ardishapur Prime. They established a new colony, and Ocilan, originally
thought assassinated, declared war against all who didn't join him in
Equilibrium. Since then, the EoM continue their war against the rest of
the cluster in obscurity, though they apparently have been making a
comeback in recent years.

Guristas
--------

The Guristas Pirates are perhaps the one pirate group that like to yarr
for the sake of yarring. Founded by Jirai Laitanen and Korako Kosakami
in YC 86, the Guristas have a bit of a colorful backstory. The two met
each other while members of the 37th Squadron (apparently, the
Octopuses) of the Caldari Navy. Within the span of a week, Laitanen was
passed over for a promotion (despite having an apparently promising
career) and Kosakami was blamed for a fatal crash landing. These
"injustices" (ok, maybe Kosakami had a valid complaint) were the
catalyst needed for the two friends to steal a pair of Condor-class
frigates and desert the Navy, heading off to the lawless lands between
the Caldari and the Gallente. They quickly set up their own pirate
organization, and have been spreading terror under their nicknames:
[Fatal and the
Rabbit](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/fatal-and-the-rabbit/).

These days, the Guristas are known for being one of the few pirate
organizations willing to hit colonies in civilized (high security)
space. They are also known for [creating civilian mining
colonies](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/all-these-lives-are-fit-to-ruin-1/)
and protecting them with their own security forces. Like the Angels,
they have a sizeable share of the Caldari grey market under their
control, and also run an illegal currency exchange. The Guristas also
played a major part in the collapse of the Crielere Project, a joint
Caldari-Gallente research initiative that, among other things, produced
the basics for cloaking technology. Tensions between the State and the
Federation rose to such a degree that, after it was revealed the Caldari
had pilfered some of the blueprints, both sides quickly withdrew
protection and funds from the Project. From there, the Guristas swooped
in, raiding the station not once, but twice, eventually making off with
the two top researchers, who eventually perished.

The Guristas are going to be a central part of the storyline in
Valkyrie. One of the bigger reveals for Valkyrie that we've had so far
is that one of the Big Players in that game is going to be Fatal, which
is all the more impressive given that Fatal is supposed to be little
more than a vegetable right now due to a cloning accident gone rather
wrong (...let's hope Valkyrie's big boss fight isn't against a giant
space carrot or something, shall we?). Anyway, it's rather clear that
Fatal has gotten his groove back, though how that happened has yet to be
made clear (or maybe it has been... I should get around to reading those
Valkyrie comics, shouldn't I?).

Intaki Syndicate
----------------

The Intaki Syndicate runs the largest black market in New Eden.
[Headed](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/silphy/) by
Silphy en Diabel (a former member of the Sisters of EVE who quickly rose
through the ranks through some cunning and ruthless strategies), the
Syndicate was originally formed by Intaki exiles from the first
Gallente-Caldari war who, like the Caldari, wanted to secede from the
Federation (a strain of thought that continues to this day in some
portions of the Intaki populace). Today, the Syndicate takes care of
much of the peacekeeping in and around Intaki space since they happen to
run quite the crime, ah, syndicate, if you didn't get that from the
name. They also excel at establishing market and banking services for
anyone who can't get what they need legally. The Syndicate also serves
as a back channel for diplomatic relations between the major empires,
which is why the Federation hasn't seen fit to close it down despite its
notoriety.

Intaki Culture
--------------

This seems as good a time as any to do a brief sidenote on Intaki
history and religion. The Intaki were originally discovered by the
Gallente in 22794 AD, about 330 years prior to the founding of the
Federation. A primitive culture at the time, they quickly caught up to
the Gallente technologically, and were one of the Federation's founding
members. However, relations with the Federation have not always been
smooth. As noted above, a sizeable fraction of the populace sympathized
with the Caldari when they seceded, and the Federation did not hesitate
to exile those who showed such sympathies.

Two later events did not help Federal relations with the Intaki. First,
in YC 108, there was a massive explosion on one of the Intaki's main
agricultural colonies on Reschard V. Despite being Federation territory,
the Federation barely responded, leaving it to the Sisters of EVE and
Mordu's Legion to coordinate rescue efforts that took almost seven
months to complete. Investigations showed that the explosion was
probably caused by a titan detonating a doomsday device in low orbit,
although neither the Sisters nor Mordu were able to discover who caused
it. Some suggest CONCORD has the answer, but they have refused to
release it.

Another event that hurt Intaki-Federal relations was the start of the
Empyrean War. Intaki had long been considered low-security space (though
they originally asked for minimal protections, they have come to resent
the minimal defense in recent years), and the Federation has never
committed significant assets to its protection. This showed when, a few
months after the new wars started up with the help of capsuleer
militias, Intaki fell to a concerted Caldari offensive. The system was
eventually auctioned off by Caldari authorities to Ishukone. The
literature suggests that there were some backroom deals between Ishukone
and unknown third parties to set up a protection scheme for Intaki
itself (though that is generally not very well known by the public).
Still, Intaki in the Federation took the system's fall hard and this has
only enlivened the secessionist debate.

One of the more unique aspects of Intaki culture is that of its
religion, Ida, meaning "to consider". The Intaki see life as just a
continuous cycle. Life leads to death leads to life. Followers of Ida
strive for moderation in all things, as that is the best way to continue
the cycle uninterrupted. Interestingly, they also believe in the rebirth
of souls. Through the use of rituals and technology, the Intaki have
found a way to ensure that souls from some dying individuals are able to
be transferred to newborn babies. These so-called Reborn are given a
place of respect among the Intaki, though the title of Idama is only
reserved for those who are Reborn without the use of technology.

InterBus
--------

A joint project between the four empires,
[InterBus](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-interbus-2/)
was created to ensure some mode of personnel and cargo transportation
throughout the Cluster. Despite being a governmental creature, it has
striven to remain above the partisan fray and stay neutral to all
parties (major empires or pirate gangs) to ensure that their shuttles
can make it through to any system or station. While InterBus has highly
accurate maps and data, they are a closely guarded secret to anyone
outside the organization. They also recently participated in the [buyout
of all CONCORD owned customs
offices](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/welcome-party/),
although that may not have been the best deal for them. On a more
interesting sidenote, it seems that CCP originally intended InterBus to
allow limited cargo ferrying between systems for a fee. Something
similar to this is finally getting introduced into the game with
Citadels, which means the mean turnaround time for getting a feature
into the game is apparently 13 years or so.

Khanid Kingdom
--------------

Another pseudo-Amarr protectorate, the Khanid Kingdom came into
existence about 300 years ago. As you may recall from the discussion on
the Amarr, the losing Heirs are all required to commit ritualistic
suicide after the succession trials. I mentioned at the time that there
were 5 royal families: the Sarums, the Kadors, the Kor-Azors, the
Ardishapurs and the Tash-Murkons. However, prior to 23041 AD, the
Khanids were actually the fifth Royal Family. In that year, the
succession trials were underway, eventually being won by Emperor
Heideran VII. This meant that the other heirs, including one Garkeh
Khanid, were expected to commit suicide. Garkeh was a young Heir,
however, and had only recently ascended to Heir status. He apparently
was rather loath to give up the role (and his life), so instead of
following ritual, he decided to secede from the Empire rather than kill
himself, crowning himself Khanid II. He was briefly opposed by his
brother, Dakos, who wanted to return to the Empire, but Dakos was
assassinated before he could mount serious resistance. This left a bit
of a bitter taste in Garkeh's mouth, however, and he apparently remains
a tad paranoid regarding his family and whether they are plotting to
overthrow him. Khanid remains a separate sovereignty to this day (and
the Tash-Murkons were elevated to the status of an Heir family), even
taking an inversion of the [Amarr
seal](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/signs-of-faith/)
to show their independence.

For being separate, however, the Khanid Kingdom today takes many affects
from the Empire. Khanid II maintained the general structure of the
Empire, including Holders and slaves. Indeed, since the whole "we don't
want to be part of your empire anymore" business, they've actually
cultivated fairly close relations with both the Empire and the Caldari
State, to the point that Khanid even has a seat on Empress Jamyl's Privy
Council. Indeed, relations apparently improved enough that Garkeh was
[allowed to participate in the Succession
Trials](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/house-khanid-inclusion-announced-as-imperial-succession-committee-lays-out-rules/)
after Jamyl's death, a fact that surprised almost all observers, but a
decision [apparently ratified by even the conservative Order of St.
Tetrimon](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/testament/).
Given that he lost in the initial rounds of the Trials, it will be very
interesting indeed to see if he follows through with Shathol'Syn this
time around.

Social speaking, the Khanid are seen as a little more progressive than
the Empire, since they need to rely on outside trade and new
technological development to survive much more so than their Amarr
counterparts.

Mordu's Legion
--------------

As with many primarily Caldari organizations, the roots of [Mordu's
Legion](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/mordus-legion/)
can be traced back to the Gallente-Caldari War. As I have discussed
already, there was a sizeable fraction of Intaki who sympathized with
the Caldari, to the point where they wanted to defect to the State. Many
of these defectors had significant military experience. In response, the
fledgling State military command put all the veterans in one squadron,
under the command of Muryia Mordu. They quickly became one of the most
successful units in the war. Afterwards, many of the Intaki settled in
the Caldari system of Kamokor. However, radicals and xenophobes soon
took control of the colony and drove the Intaki out. In desperation,
they called Muryia for help, who was happy to oblige. They quickly
retook the colony, and from there, Muryia decided to constitute the
Legion. Today, the Legion stands as the premier mercenary squadron in
New Eden (take THAT, Pandemic Legion). Indeed, the Legion is so
well-regarded that they were called upon by Ishukone and the Gallente
senate to act as a neutral police force on Caldari Prime.

The Legion has cultivated close ties with the State, despite not being
controlled by them. As such, the State often gives Mordu access to
cutting edge technology. However, Mordu (as seen in *Templar One*) is
willing to assist anyone, and he alone decides which contracts the
Legion will take up. He's a bit of an oddball, and is well-known for his
odd sense of fashion, but he's still very much revered by the Intaki
veterans and others who have joined the Legion since. The Legion
provides no training, and expects those who want to join to be
well-versed in combat already.

Mordu's Legion, apparently a leader in manufacturing... death or
something, was a founding member of the manufacturer's alliance called
Upwell Consortium.

Outer Ring Excavations (ORE)
----------------------------

Miner RPers out there can rejoice: even YOU can RP thanks to [Outer Ring
Excavations](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/outer-ring-excavations/)!
The biggest mining consortium in New Eden, ORE (see what they did
there?) was founded back in YC 91 when its founder, Yani Sar Arteu,
broke away from the Gallente mining consortium Astral Mining. Arteu
decided to strike off into the outer regions of New Eden, making his
home in Outer Ring and Cloud Ring. Until then, those regions had only
been considered of moderate value, and not particularly worth the risk
of mining out there. However, that was before the discovery of noxcium,
a rare mineral that forms only during a supernova. The ore is vital for,
among other things, building capsules. Once the importance of the ore
was discovered, ORE became a massive and wealthy company almost
overnight. Rumor has it that they had discovered a small moon worth of
the stuff, giving them a massive market share in the new mineral.
Although the various empires (notably the Gallente) tried to demand the
location of the large deposit, ORE kept the location secret and built
its market share. Today, ORE is well known for developing
top-of-the-line mining ships and equipment. It was originally close to
Mordu's Legion, but that changed when Serpentis (discussed below) bought
a majority share in ORE. That changed AGAIN when the Upwell Consortium
and Mordu's Legion [helped Yani regain majority control of
ORE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZyYs4sdBTvk) and send Serpentis
[scampering off with its figurative tail between its
legs](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/ore-membership-of-upwell-consortium-confirmed-by-yani-sar-arteu-in-aftermath-of-station-seizures/).
ORE promptly joined Upwell as soon as Yani regained control, which
probably shouldn't surprise anyone.

Rogue Drones
------------

Rogue Drones a bit unique. They're not quite a faction, but they're
significant enough to warrant their discussion here.

As might be expected given their reliance on drone technology, [rogue
drones](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/rogue-drones/)
had their start in Gallente military research. There was a continued
drive to put more and more weapons on bigger and bigger drones that were
getting smarter and smarter all the time (you can probably see where
this is going). Some of these drones were even equipped with warp
drives: they were ships with everything except a human in command. Well,
the inevitable happened (as it tends to do), and the drones at some
point gained sentience and realized that they didn't particularly enjoy
being bossed around by ugly bags of mostly water. They soon went on a
rampage, escaping from their labs. The incident prompted CONCORD to
issue directive Omega-One-Five, banning all research into creating
self-aware artificial intelligences.

The now-escaped drones began to act as many living things do: making
their homes in space, mining for minerals, and attacking other living
things (read: ships) in order to appropriate their resources. The drones
next popped up when the Gallente discovered a few new regions. During
[Operation Spectrum
Breach](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/eve-online-news/offline-stargates-activate-spontaneously-concord-officials-issue-general-travel-advisory-1/),
they began colonizing the new systems in YC 88. About 4 months into the
process, however, the drones under Gallente command went berserk,
killing hundreds. This happened simultaneously across dozens of systems.
The Gallente quickly locked down the regions (now known, appropriately,
as the Drone Regions) When CONCORD discovered the new colonies and what
happened, they immediately took jurisdiction over the gates and
continued the lockdown. They initiated a review of Gallente actions in
the Code Aria Inquiry, documenting what the investigation found in their
[*report*](http://go-dl.eve-files.com/media/1004/CodeAria.zip). The
report suggested that the Gallente and CreoDron had violated
Omega-One-Five under a project codenamed Orphyx and created more
self-aware drones in the process. The report was kept top-secret, and
apparently not even released to the four empires. The Gallente were
highly embarrassed about this, of course, and halted their expansion
programs.

The Drone Regions were cut off from the rest of New Eden for the next 20
years, and CONCORD seemed to have every intention of keeping them locked
down. The situation changed dramatically however in [YC
108](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/eve-online-news/offline-stargates-activate-spontaneously-concord-officials-issue-general-travel-advisory-1/)
when the gates to the Drone Regions re-enabled themselves. CONCORD was
unable to lock the gates down again. Around this time, the Code Aria
report was leaked to the public, prompting outcries from both the
[public and
governments](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/eve-online-news/concord-report-on-drone-region-operations-leaked-1/)
alike. However, the damage was done and the Drone Regions remain open to
this day.

Sansha's Nation
---------------

Zombies have long been a part of popular culture (and only seem to be
growing in popularity), so it only makes sense that a cyberpunk version
of zombies made their appearance in EVE. They make their appearance
through the pirates known as [Sansha's
Nation](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/sanshas-nation/).
Founded by Sansha Kuvakei, the Nation originally started as a way for
Kuvakei to fulfill his utopian ideals. He and his Caldari family had
grown rich through arms manufacturing during the Gallente-Caldari war,
and he struck out in YC 4 to settle what would eventually be called the
Stain region. Out there, he set out to build his empire, preaching his
utopian ideals. His nation and his beliefs earned great praise
throughout the Cluster and he soon found himself on the front edge of
galactic politics. Unfortunately, Kuvakei had a bit of a megalomaniacal
streak to him, and all the praise went to his head. He began to
seriously believe himself as a kind of deity (or perhaps he was always
crazy), and believed that others should serve him. If they did not want
to willingly serve him, he would make them serve him. He began
experimenting with the recently-gifted capsuleer implant technology to
create so-called True Slaves: people who have lost their own free will
and are under the direct control of Kuvakei (the Amarr, in their
infinite kindness, gave Kuvakei a number of Matari slaves to experiment
on in hopes of gaining better slave control technology). A "lucky" few
are allowed to retain some degree of free will: these are known as True
Citizens, and often serve in leadership roles. Kuvakei's command and
control scheme is quite extensive, utilizing direct linkups from each
drone into a kind of hive mind (if he starts calling himself the Borg
Queen, I'm leaving again). Despite these experiments, the empires either
truly didn't know the extent of his experiments or chose to ignore the
obvious slavery implications.

However, the full extent of his experiments came to light in YC 34YC 34.
Despite the monstrous experiments, they did have one positive result: it
led to the creation of the first (and, to my knowledge, only) offensive
that was coordinated among all four of the major empires, led by the
Gallente. They swept through Stain, wiping out all known colonies and
presumably killing Kuvakei himself. The remaining small cadre of Nation
officers was left to drift for several decades. They eventually managed
to re-organize, and reappeared in the galactic scene in YC 105,
attacking the Amarr Empire and the Angel Cartel for a while. However,
they seemed to be of no particularly major threat to anyone, and despite
some talk of a major offensive to wipe them out again, nothing happened,
and the Nation soon drifted into obscurity again.

Unexpectedly, the Nation returned with a vengeance in YC 112. After
almost 4 years of near silence, the Nation suddenly began invading the
heart of empire space, raiding planets and [abducting
millions](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/multiple-sansha-attacks-reported-low-security-population-left-devastated/)
from the surface, presumably for transformation into True Slaves. Sansha
Kuvakei has also apparently re-emerged, although not everyone is
convinced that this is actually Kuvakei instead of a replacement of some
kind. Capsuleers soon came to the rescue when it became clear that
Empire navies and CONCORD were unable to deal with the coordinated,
lightning swift assaults that soon became the Nation's hallmark (these
attacks, not to be confused with incursions, are known as live events.
Generally these were led by one Sansha member played by a CCP employee,
and he would bring hundreds of ships into one system and players are
expected to respond and defend the colonies. These live events (of which
there are other kinds) can be very entertaining, and a great way to dip
your toe into RPing if you're looking for a way to get started. Keep an
eye on the game world news; there tends to be a heads up there if live
events are coming). Things grew more ominous when it was discovered that
the Nation had discovered how to create their own wormholes to invade
any system they chose, and even MORE ominous when pictures suggested
that the Nation had conquered at least [one Jove
system](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/eve-online-news/capsuleer-probe-scouts-other-side-of-nation-wormhole-returns-images-of-jovian-space.-1/)
to serve as a base of operations. The only response from the Jove was a
terse message explaining that they had retaken the station in question.
That message has been the last that anyone has heard from the Jove.

These days, the Nation has for the most part abandoned its single-system
strategy after a climactic battle in Yulai near the end of YC 113. The
Nation now favors constellation-wide
[incursions](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2011/01/31/emergency-travel-advisory/),
where they attempt to disrupt life as much as humanly possible, with
CONCORD not really caring other than paying us capsuleers to take care
of the problem. After his initial appearances, in which he started
taking a rather anti-capsuleer stances on things, Kuvakei hasn't been
heard from in quite some time. What IS clear, however is that the
Empires show no interest in repeating the unprecedented sweep they
undertook in YC 37.

With the mass discovery of Thera and its related shattered systems,
which I discuss more in-depth below, the origin of Sansha's wormhole
technology has become a bit clearer. When I delved into the Talocan
waaaaaaaaaay back in the beginning of the guide (FEELS LIKE FOREVER,
DOESN'T IT. UNLESS YOU AREN'T READING IN ORDER. IN WHICH CASE, KUDOS TO
YOU, NON-LINEAR READERS), I had noted that the Talocan had developed
static gate technology. Sansha wrecks can be found in certain shattered
systems epicenters, which, as you may recall, housed many almost-working
specimens of the static gate technology. It's fairly easy then to make
the connection that Sansha stole or reverse engineered the static gate
tech to allow him to commence his incursions into New Eden, and, indeed,
the [One
Chronicle](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/inheritance/)
confirms that this is exactly what happens, though it takes pains to
note that Sansha doesn't really understand the technology underlying the
static gates, and that his version of the tech is much clunkier and less
wieldy compared to the tech available to the Talocan or even the Jove.
That, of course, still leaves open the question of how Sansha managed to
get to these special systems in the first place, but maybe another
all-encompassing chronicle will come along down the line to make it all
clear in one fell swoop.

Serpentis
---------

The major drug runners in Eve, Serpentis was originally created as a
legitimate biochemical company in the Federation. Founded by Igil
Sarpati back when neural boosters were legal throughout New Eden, the
company quickly degenerated to the darker side of biochemistry by
investing heavily in the drug and booster trade after boosters were
outlawed (for SOME reason the empires thought dying a terrible and
painful death was a *bad* thing).

Today, the company is a broad-based high-tech R&D company with a core
competency in biochemistry (that's a fancy and corporate-speak way of
saying that they make drugs). The current CEO, Salvador Sarpati, Igil's
adopted son, moved the corporation out to the Fountain region, and even
bought himself his own system: Serpentis Prime. The Sarpatis continue to
run Serpentis out in the depths of null security space: the only
exception is Salvador's sister Santimona, who is currently head of the
Sisters of Eve. Serpentis continues to research and produce boosters and
other illicit drugs for capsuleers and the public alike, though they do
their best to cloak their actions in running a legitimate corporation.
As mentioned above, the Serpentis have cultivated a close relationship
with the Angel Cartel, particularly their Guardian Angels, who guard
their research assets. Given how they were treated after getting booted
from ORE stations, it's safe to say that the Serpentis harbor no good
will towards Upwell interests.

Sisters of Eve
--------------

CCP prides itself on showing humanity's darker side in EVE Online. But
even in EVE, there has to be SOME force for good. That force mostly
manifests itself in the Servant Sisters of Eve, a humanitarian aid
organization universally recognized for its neutrality and dedication to
helping any and all who need it (think of it as the Red Cross of the EVE
universe). Originating in the depths of the Caldari-Gallente War, the
Sisterhood prides itself as the leading humanitarian aid organization in
the Cluster. Since its formation, it led relief missions during the
Minmatar Rebellion as well as the brief Amarr-Jove War. Today, it has
established a number of sanctuaries for weary travelers or those seeking
safety, most of them just outside of empire space, though some refugee
camps are established within empire space [as
necessary](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2011/11/20/sister-camp/). The
organization is headed by the Reverend Mother, currently Santimona
Sarpati, the sister to the head of the Serpentis Corporation, though the
two organizations (and siblings, for that matter) are in no way close.
Beyond the Sisterhood itself, it also runs a food relief program known
simply as Food Relief.

Beyond its humanitarian mission, however, the Sisterhood is also a
religious order. Another division of the Sisterhood, known as [the
Sanctuary](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/black-mountain-the-sanctuary/),
focuses its work on the study of what it calls a calls a 'relic from
God': the [EVE
Gate](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2009/12/17/new-eden/). Headed by
the High Priestess Harna Durado, the Sanctuary is the premier research
institution that studies the Gate. What, if anything, they've found in
the Gate has remained a mystery to the general public, but they are
known to keep a ship stationed as close the Gate as it can get without
being ripped apart by the *intense turbulence* (the Gate, alas, is
located approximately 3 lightyears outside of the New Eden system, and
is inaccessible to us capsuleers). High Priestess Durado has decreed
that research continue, however, since they believe that the Gate is key
to getting access to heaven. Evidence indicates that the Sanctuary is a
bit more... shall we say *militant* than the other branches of the
Sisters. If any conspiracies against the capsuleer regime are going to
appear, you can bet that they'll start in the Sanctuary.

As always, however, it looks like the Sisters have an ulterior agenda.
Although publicly the Sisterhood has distanced itself from the current
unofficial head of the Intaki Syndicate, Silphy en Diabel, there are
[some
indications](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/ante/)
that the Sisters and the Syndicate have worked together to use unwitting
capsuleers as part of its research projects. A few years back, all
capsuleers received a limited edition shuttle known as the Zephyr,
designed by the Intaki polymath Valsas en Dilat. For unknown reasons,
there does appear to be some indication of collusion with the Syndicate
to use the Zephyrs, which are apparently invisible to Sleepers (meaning
that they can fly around any Sleeper site in w-space without getting
attacked by the drones... players of course are another matter, and they
are visible to Drifters as well) to collect data for the Sisters.
Obviously, this isn't known to the general populace (indeed, only Silphy
and Santimona appear to know anything about it), so it should be
considered off-limits to characters, but it's an interesting subplot
nonetheless.

The Sisters' skeeziness has upped to the level of ULTRASKEEZE in recent
days with the discovery that they know much more about recent happenings
in Thera and other shattered systems than they had previously let on.
When capsuleers first entered Thera, which I discuss in its own section
later on, we had expected to find a virgin, uncolonized system. What we
found instead were not one, not two, but FOUR fully functional Sisters
stations, with the ruins of four others, making it clear that not only
had they made it to Thera before the rest of the Cluster, but that they
had been in Thera long enough to make a significant presence there. Many
of their facilities are dedicated to research of and experimentation
with the various Sleeper and Talocan technologies that can be found
throughout Anoikis. What their ultimate goals are with this research,
why they hid it, and how they got here before the rest of the Cluster,
are still very much unknown (a phrase I feel like I've been saying even
more than jokes about how the Amarr are slow and plodding), but they
have become
[more](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/leaked-reports-reveal-soe-presence-in-wormhole-systems-researching-drifter-technology/)
and
[more](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/soe-confirms-research-into-drifters-and-discusses-preliminary-findings/)
[brazen](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2016/02/28/sisters-of-eve-flotilla/)
in recent weeks.

Society of Conscious Thought
----------------------------

As with anything Jove-related, the [Society of Conscious
Thought](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/society-of-conscious-thought/)
is best described as a mystery wrapped in an
[enigma](http://eve.wikia.com/wiki/Enigma) wrapped in a
person-with-a-genetic-deformity-that-will-lead-to-death-by-depression.
Founded about 300 years ago now by Ior Labron, the Society was
originally founded as a spiritual institution and an attempt to discern
the meaning of life, based partly on [the
teachings](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-truth-serum/)
of Ior's mentor, Gorda Hoje. Though the Jove are not generally a
spiritual people, those that do look towards faith look with zest.
Although it had its start as a religious institution, the Society soon
took on a political dimension, gaining quite a bit of clout within the
Jovian Directorate and in many respects acting like a shadow government.
Eventually, the clout became too much, and the Society was kicked out of
the politics business. Thoroughly chastised, the Society withdrew from
political life, and various splinter groups of the Society settled in
remote regions. These settlements, named kitzes, were self-sustaining
enclaves where research continued apace. They also established schools
that quickly became well-respected throughout the Cluster.

The Society is not without its [darker
side](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/black-mountain-hyperconsciousness/),
however. It came to light a few decades ago that some kitzes were
apparently working with Sansha Kuvakei to help develop his True Slaves.
This again rocked the Society back on its heels, and in an attempt to
repair relations with the Cluster, the Society opened its renowned
schools up to all races. It also set its sight on a new, seemingly more
benign area of research: the social sciences. The Society soon realized
through its research that it was possible to individually tailor
educational programs to a specific child based on that child's
tendencies, and that these programs could even help curb detrimental
tendencies in a child. This in and of itself was nothing new in
education, but as usual, the Jove took things a bit too far when it
combined these new programs with its research on mood enhancers. What
many people would call a form of brainwashing, the Society called its
[Hyperconsciousness](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/black-mountain-hyperconsciousness/)
agenda, and it's been used on the children admitted to its schools for
quite a while now (the extent of the program is not known publicly).

More recently, the Society has focused its efforts on technology that
helps its social sciences studies, including an amnesiac agent. Much of
its effort in recent years, however, has been focused around the Book of
Emptiness. The Book, in reality a small machine named after a lost Amarr
[holy](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-book-of-emptiness-part-one/)
[book](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-book-of-emptiness-part-two/),
was an attempt to cure the Jovian Disease by removing all negative
thoughts and emotions. Unfortunately, it had the unintended side effect
of reducing its users to slobbering idiots. Needless to say, it was
rejected as a cure for the Disease, but the Society has focused its
research efforts on it in recent years regardless, even if its agenda is
not known publicly. Indeed, publicly, the Society and its kitzes are
still held in very high regard as the premier educational institutions
in New Eden.

After being quiet in the news for several years, the Society suddenly
rose to prominence again in the latter half of YC 117. In one of the
last public appearances before Jamyl's death, her Avatar-class Titan was
scanned by one [Matshi
Raish](https://gate.eveonline.com/Profile/Matshi%20Raish), an Elder
Mentor of the Society and one of its most public figures. After he
refused to stop his scans, his ship was rather [unceremoniously blown
up](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/breaking-news-society-of-conscious-thought-vessel-downed-in-sarum-prime/)
by Amarr naval forces. Before his ship died, however, Raish seemed
content with the results of his scans. We learn later in the [Chronicle
of the
Damned](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/inheritance/)
that Raish was merely podded and sent off to his medical clone. It turns
out that the Society had had concerns regarding Jamyl and her
friend-that-no-one-else-can-hear for quite a while, and the scans they
performed confirmed that there were two brain patterns in Jamyl's mind.

After his resurrection, he spends most of the Prime Chronicle discussing
most of the major plot points of New Eden over the past few years with
his Jovian mentor (and one of the few still remaining in the Cluster).
In gratitude for continuing the lengthy, *lengthy* discussions, the
Jovian mentor appoints the Society as the heirs to the Jovian legacy,
and specifically appoints Raish to the Jovian seat on CONCORD's Inner
Circle. Not too shabby a prize for listening to some old windbag talk
for a few thousand words, eh?

Upwell Consortium
-----------------

The Consortium is a newcomer to interstellar economics but is quickly
becoming one of the leading commercial enterprises in the Cluster. They
were [formed back in November of YC
117](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/founding-of-upwell-consortium-announced-by-leading-interstellar-corporations/)
by a conglomerate of, well, corporate conglomerates. The founding
members of the Consortium, Chemal Tech, Eifyr & Co., Intaki Bank,
Mordu's Legion, Ytiri, and Zoar & Sons (they've since added ORE to the
Consortium and negotiated deals with both InterBus and Impetus, an
entertainment company), are [not the bigger names in Cluster
business](http://crossingzebras.com/operation-frostline-an-introduction/),
but combined they make up a hefty share of revenue. Notably, the Intaki
Bank's involvement means that, if necessary, Upwell can get its money
laundered quicker than I can get a clean pair of jeans on Sunday,
demonstrating that not all of Upwell is intended for the up and up. They
quickly named Yani Sar Arteu as the chairperson of the board of
directors, who promptly [stole back his
toys](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/ore-membership-of-upwell-consortium-confirmed-by-yani-sar-arteu-in-aftermath-of-station-seizures/)
from the mean old Serpentis. For capsuleer purposes, Upwell is
particularly notable as they're the ones who are
[developing](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/upwell-consortium-announces-development-of-citadel-line-of-stations-for-capsuleer-market/)
the [upcoming
citadels](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2016/01/30/astrahus-exemplar-site/)
for all of our docking/destructive needs.

Upwell tried to get on the capsuleer community's good side by offering
us ~~bribes~~
[prizes](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/upwell-consortium-citadel-construction-project-begins-amidst-promotional-extravaganza/)
to help us further their research efforts. Between the rather
Orwellian-named [Department of Friendship and Mutual
Assistance](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/upwell-claims-serpentis-sabotage-while-responding-to-capsuleer-attacks-on-citadel-construction-sites/)
and the fact that the Upwell's PR spokeswoman, Lee Brinalle, seems more
falsely chipper than CSM candidates promising us that they will finally
force CCP to give us puppies in our CQ, we can basically assume that
Upwell has nothing but our best interests at heart. Perhaps most
ominously, the very first thing that Matshi Raish asks after being
elevated to CONCORD's inner circle in the One True Chronicle is
regarding Upwell, demonstrating that the Society has its own concerns
about the new corporate conglomerate.

Technology
==========

For a game that takes place 21,000 years in the future, technology
actually plays a fairly secondary role in the lore. That is a testament
to CCP's content writers who avoid, as much as possible, the whole
"technobabble saves us all" approach to conflict resolution (much as it
pains me to say this, my beloved Star Trek is particularly bad at this).
Still, it'd be ridiculous if CCP didn't lay down SOME background
knowledge on the technology that makes our lives in space possible. I'm
only going to be covering the big ones here, but there's a LOT of lore
out there for anyone who's interested in the more mechanical side of
things (or there used to be and hopefully will be again).

Capsules
--------

Ah, the capsule. The pod. The egg. As particularly bad trolls try to say
in help chat now and then (feel free to say hi to me in there if you see
me), some think it's a sign that you've leveled up when it first
appears. The
[capsule](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/scientific-articles/ppcc-part-1-the-capsule-and-the-clone/)
is the singular achievement that separates us players of EVE Online from
the general unkempt masses. The deep history of the capsule is, to my
knowledge, completely unknown to us, in game or out. What we do know is
that the Jove (for reasons unknown) [offered
Ishukone](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/short-stories/the-jovian-wet-grave/)
capsule technology in 23224 AD, shortly before the battle at
Iyen-Oursta. In exchange, Ishukone handed over significant amounts of
cultural and social information.

The capsule offers a pilot complete and unfettered access to a ship
using only one's mind, while cocooning the body in a hydrostatic fluid
containing oxygen and nutrients that dampens undue stresses (and means
that we breathe and eat liquid which is just WEIRD, but [not unknown to
science](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquid_breathing)). Connections
are made directly to the pilot's nervous system that allows them to feel
each time a ship gets hit, to move the ship as one would move a muscle,
and to see out of a ship's [camera
drones](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/camera-drones/)
as if it were their own eyes. The ship's computer even creates sounds to
feed into a pilot's auditory cortex to help the pilot situate himself in
space. This direct connection to the ship drastically lowers a ship's
crew requirements, while also dramatically decreasing reaction times.
The end result is a faster, leaner ship that has even more capabilities
than a ship with a crew twice its size. This, incidentally, is the
theoretical reason why we players are able to kill rats as easily as we
do. Capsule-piloted ships are so efficient that they take on ships the
same size or even larger vessels with nary a scratch. Obviously, when a
pod-piloted vessel explodes, one of its last orders of business is to
safely eject the pod from the dying ship (the rest of the crew may or
may not be as lucky).

But the capsule is not without its risks. Beyond the risk that a
potential pilot doesn't have the proper [genetic
makeup](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/scientific-articles/ppcc-part-1-the-capsule-and-the-clone/),
the biggest risk to the average would-be capsuleer (ignoring the
apparently painful process of adapting your body to the capsule; you
know, holes in your spine, parts of your skull peeled away to make way
for implants, etc...) is something known as
"[mindlock](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/short-stories/the-jovian-wet-grave/)."
It apparently occurs when the brain isn't able to "shrink" itself back
down to a mere human body. It got accustomed to controlling the pod
and/or ship, and once unplugged, it couldn't re-engage its connection to
the much more frail human body. In the chronicle I linked here, it's
quite clear that a mindlocked pilot is still fully conscious and aware
of what's going on around him, just unable to move. However, even the
Jove apparently didn't know at that time whether a person was still
conscious in a mindlocked pilot. It's still not clear where the state of
research is on mindlock in modern times. What IS clear, however, is that
the incident rate of mindlock is very low today, thanks to better
training techniques, so it's not a big deal these days.

Even if you meet the minimal requirements, however, becoming a pod pilot
is a time consuming endeavor. Potential candidates have to be in perfect
physical condition and basically a genius (fun fact: you need an
advanced degree to become a capsuleer, so congratulations on all you new
Space Doctors out there!). After that begins a five year physical and
technical training program, which includes such fun activities as 10
days of sensory deprivation, shock simulations, and other grueling
physical tests to accustom your mind to the concept of thinking of the
ship as its body. The last step in the training program is submitting to
voluntary euthanasia to clone yourself to your new body (so sorry to all
of those high sec people who say they've never been podded before).

Cloning
-------

While the capsule alone dramatically increases a ship's effectiveness,
the thing that truly makes us pod pilots truly immortal is the joining
of a capsule with cloning technology. Cloning has been around in New
Eden for a while (a business prospectus of one cloning company, Cromeaux
Inc., can be found
[here](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/scientific-articles/cloning/),
which describes the basic process). But this isn't modern real life
cloning, where your DNA is taken and a clone is grown like a child would
be. Rather, biomass of some kind (usually, human cadavers in the high
quality clones (yes, [it's made of
people](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-vicious-cycle/)),
but apparently any kind of biomass will do) is used to create a human
body with functioning organs. These generic humans are then seeded with
a customer's DNA and stem cells, so within a few months the body is made
up mostly of a customer's own actual DNA. Tattoos, skin coloration, and
piercings can be applied as the process continues. The one organ missing
is the brain.

The brain is instead grown individually after a cloning contract is
created. When a person becomes a clone company's customer, a brain scan
is taken to get the brain's shape and major nerve clusters positioned
appropriately. This scan is used to create a gel model that eventually
leads to neuronal growth that matches the customer's own brain
structures. This new brain is seeded with receptors attached to an FTL
communication receiver. If that's a bit too technobabble-y for you, the
process is essentially that a person's personal brain is created from
the scan, it just doesn't have any power to it yet.

At the moment of a customer's death (which is triggered by basically
almost any change in pressure in the pod's fluid, so as to trigger
almost immediately upon pod breach), a snapshot of the brain is taken
using a transneural burning scanner. This scanner is able to see, down
to individual neurons, the exact state of a person's mind at the time of
death. The scanning process has the somewhat unfortunate side-effect of
completely destroying the original brain (and if that's not sufficient,
a quick-acting neurotoxin is injected just to be sure), but it is able
to then transmit the brain's state via FTL communications to the new
clone. In the new brain, the transmitted patterns can quickly be almost
precisely duplicated using the aforementioned receivers. The whole
process of transferring consciousness can be completed within moments.

Unfortunately, modern burning scanners are somewhat large contraptions
that require a person's head to be in precise alignment at the moment of
death. Because planning death this precisely can be difficult, cloning
and transfer never quite gained wide traction throughout the cluster,
remaining the province of the rich for the most part. This changed,
however, [when engineers
realized](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/scientific-articles/cloning/)
that there was a significant and growing population who would always be
in the same position when they were most likely to die: pod pilots. The
two technologies were successfully combined in YC 104, with the neural
scanner now tied directly to a pod's structural integrity system. When
the pod detects a breach of any kind (since the chances of surviving a
pod breach are minimal anyway), the scanner is automatically activated
and that body is instantly killed, with the consciousness of that person
transferred to the new clone body (Soul? We don't need to know what a
stinkin' soul is). CONCORD quickly authorized (and, indeed, required)
the use of cloning technology in pod pilots in YC 105 (conveniently, the
game year that EVE Online starts in). The age of the pod pilot had
begun.

Since then, we've had some further advances in cloning technology. One
such development was the jump clone. Activating a jump clone is
essentially podding yourself in a controlled environment. But because
you killed yourself *carefully*, technicians are able to salvage the
implants from your head and make sure they don't get damaged before
plugging it into the new clone. Ostensibly, the cool-down timer after
clone jumping is to allow technicians time to prep the new clone for you
to jump back into, as well as to ensure your mind isn't too damaged in
the process. The other major development (at least for RP purposes) in
cloning tech is the concept of soft cloning. The idea is that, if you're
willing, you're able to create mental-state-images of your brain using a
slower, less-death-inducing brain scan than the transneural burning
scanner used when there's a pod breach. The scan takes a few hours to
complete, but ensures that even if capsuleers are killed outside of
their pods, some version of their mental state survives to be installed
in a new clone (even if it means that you lose a few days/weeks/months
of memories since the last time you made a ZIP disk backup of your
noggin). The concept of soft cloning had long been hypothesized by the
RP community, and has fallen in and out of fashion in the official
canon, but its existence was recently confirmed (again) by CCP (and was
even briefly alluded to in the
[All-Chronicle](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/inheritance/)).

DUST 514 Technology
-------------------

DUST 514 has added its fair bit of new tech. The most important of which
involves the mercenary implants, which takes the aforementioned cloning
technology to a new extreme. I mentioned above that normal cloning
scanners require the head to be precisely positioned in order to
properly scan and download a pilot's neural patterns. However, in
*Templar One* (if you haven't figured it out yet, you may want to
consider reading this book if you have an interest in deep EVE lore...
but if you're looking for a (very) brief over, see [this
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GI53ydJaus8)), a new conscience
transfer technology is discovered. Found in Sleeper ruins, the new
implant offers the same basic functionality of the old-style (I use the
term loosely for something that humans won't invent for another 21,000
years) transneural burning scanner, but with a number of important
differences. Perhaps the most important one is the range limitation. Pod
pilots, when killed, have their neural data sent via quantum entangled
atoms. Because quantum entanglement has no obvious range limitations, a
pod pilot can be killed anywhere and still be resurrected, as long as
they are within their pod. Given how the mercenary implants work,
however, such a range is impossible. Thus, DUST mercenaries must be
within a few thousand kilometers of their Clone Reanimation Units (where
the merc respawns after death) in order to ensure that the data is
transferred correctly. But the changes go beyond that. As noted above,
when pod pilots die, their entire neural profile is transferred at the
moment of death and recreated in a new brain. However, for DUST
soldiers, the soldier's personality is centrally stored in a computer
somewhere, along with all of his knowledge and skills. When the soldier
dies, the implants transmit back a small update file that only includes
memories and skills obtained since the last time the soldier's neural
data was downloaded. The new, updated personality construct is then
downloaded to a new body and the solider is sent off to battle once
again.

The Amarr first stumbled across these implants while investigating
Sleeper ruins (fun semi-relevant story: I made a note here in all caps
and in bold after I finished the previous iteration of the Guide that
merely said "**OTHER**". I can only assume I meant to remind myself that
I should add a note that the Amarr were led to the Sleeper ruins by the
Other-infested Jamyl, but its entirely possible I just wanted to remind
myself that there are other ruins out there?). They found intact, but
seemingly dead, bodies and took them in to study. They eventually
discovered the implant's capabilities and were, naturally, intrigued by
them. However, the Amarr were unable to reproduce the implants
themselves. Faced with this unprecedented military technology, they did
what any God-fearing society would do: they resorted to grave robbing.
They soon culled hundreds, if not thousands, of these implants and used
them for their own purposes. The other empires (with a little help from
CONCORD and good ol' Directive Alpha Gamma 12) soon caught wind of these
programs, and set to work on their own research initiatives, following
the same grave-robbing techniques the Amarr first pioneered.

The problem, of course, was that the Sleepers they were culling the
implants from [weren't actually
dead](http://dust514.com/media/fiction/fiveonefour/). They were simply
living up to their names: they were sleeping. The implants, apparently,
not only serve to transfer a conscience to a new body; they also help
connect that conscience to the Sleeper mainframe, as it were. When the
implants were removed from the Sleeper bodies, at least parts of the
Sleeper conscience remained in the implants. And it turns out they
didn't much appreciate being ripped out of their own bodies and used for
the designs of us lesser civilizations. They would briefly take over the
new mercenary soldiers, making them speak in tongues and have strange
visions.

The Amarr eventually recognized what was going on and, with massive
effort, managed to create their own functionally equivalent implant
technology. Seeing that harvesting more of these implants could incur
further wrath from the Sleepers, Empress Jamyl [authorized each of the
empires to have access to her
alternative](http://dust514.com/media/fiction/fiveonefour/) (though
whether she was acting of her own accord or the Other's is another
matter entirely), Sleeper-less implants. And thus, DUST 514 launched
with each empire having their own sets of immortal infantry, apparently
free of the terrifying visions that hampered previous incarnations of
soldiers. Despite obvious advantages, it doesn't look like capsuleers
will be gaining access to this technology anytime soon. Oh, and I should
mention that I believe the same strict compatibility requirements for
capsuleers apply to the new implants.

Beyond that, the technology in DUST revolves around [guns, guns, and
more guns](http://www.dust514.org/item-database) (along with vehicles
that carry aforementioned guns). EVE Online players should recognize
some of the guns as miniaturized versions of our beloved space pew pew
modules, but there are sure to be new things out there. The Art
Department seems to have done an excellent job with keeping the themes
of each race. Gallente merc technology has that green, organic feel to
it, while at times it looks like Amarr mercs are clothed in pure gold. I
haven't seen much to indicate that, beyond the implant technology, there
will be much to revolutionize EVE technology. Still, the ability to
bombard planets back to the stone age from orbit ought to put a smile on
anyone's face.

One final note before I move on: CCP has made it clear that DUST 514
refers to something, but what specifically hasn't been quite spelled out
yet. I would guess that DUST (which, according to CCP, is meant to be
capitalized as such) is an acronym for something. And the [514
chronicle](http://dust514.com/media/fiction/fiveonefour/) states that
each soldier with the Sleeper implants had terrifying visions. Given the
upcoming shutdown of DUST, if CCP doesn't let us know I will be QUITE
the ticked-off Lore-Guide-Author, LET ME TELL YOU.

Faster-Than-Light Communications
--------------------------------

FTL communication was actually developed significantly after the
development of FTL travel. Strangely, after FTL travel was developed, a
ship became the fastest way to spread information, a situation not
really seen since the great Age of Exploration on Earth before the
development of radio. As the interstellar community grew, some form of
communications proved necessary to allow communications across the
hundred light-years of New Eden. Many attempts were made to solve the
problem, and it was such a problem that even the ancient civilizations
seemed to [have their own
problems](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2011/10/02/hyperbole-nexus/)
with the concept. Some had hoped that the idea of entangled particles
(quarks and atoms that, through some quantum mechanical wizardry,
instantaneously respond to a stimulus on one of the tangled particles,
regardless of how many light years apart the two particles are) would
solve the problem. While this line of research seemed promising, no data
seemed to be able to be transmitted through entangled particles; only
random noise made it through the gauntlet of quantum statistical
probability.

The breakthrough came from a young Gallente scientist, Li Azbel,
although she might well have been Minmatar given her solution. Her
solution is [complicated and filled with
technobabble](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/scientific-articles/faster-than-light-communication/)
that would make a Trekkie proud, but it essentially comes down to using
that random noise to her advantage. Rather than transmitting data bit by
bit, she discovered she was able to modulate the amount and frequency of
the noise itself, which lead to being able to transmit data. With this
breakthrough (using useless junk to piggyback data onto), engineers were
quickly able to construct fluid routers made up of entangled particles.
These routers were soon joined into a massive communications network
that today spans the cluster, and allows us now to contact any person
anywhere.

Stargates
---------

Stargates are the backbone of New Eden, shaping the cluster and its
politics as we know it. The gate network snakes throughout New Eden, and
today lets us cross over 100 light-years in just a few hours.
Conceptually, jumpgates are actually fairly easy to understand: they're
artificially created wormholes that take you from one system to another.
It's their construction that mucks things up a bit.

As I mentioned during the Empires section, our modern stargates are
based on the wrecks and ruins of stargates originally built during the
first colonization of the Cluster (while we know the reason for the
fairly rapid colonization of the cluster, ingame scholars apparently
continue to debate the reasons for it). The Amarr were the [first to
discover](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/scientific-articles/interstellar-traveling/)
the near-perfect ruins of a gate in Amarr Prime, which let them fairly
easily reverse-engineer the working principles. The problem that they
ran into was that a single gate is not enough: it needs a partner. So
before the Amarr could activate the gate in their own system, they had
to send out ships filled with crews in cryogenic suspension. The ships
would travel on their own for years or even decades until coming to the
new star system, at which point the crews are woken up and they
construct the companion gate. While most of the time these journeys
ended well, there have been some [very close
calls](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/old-man-star/).
The discovery of jump drives only came about recently, and even today
there are dozens of ships heading out into the unknown to try to
construct the next set of gates.

Stargates can only work in certain locations. The artificial wormholes
are created at points of gravitational resonance (essentially, where
gravity waves can cancel each other out, like at Lagrange points for the
more scientifically inclined, or when you create a [standing
wave](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_wave)). At these resonance
points, the gravitational shear is so intense that it becomes easy to
just poke a hole through space-time. The hole doesn't necessarily
connect to anywhere at first, but if two gates are near each other and
told to activate at the same time, they Technobabble their way into
opening a wormhole between the systems every time you jump. CCP made me
a very happy camper by retconning that these stable gravitational nodes
can now be found on the edges of solar systems or near planets of
sufficient mass (originally, a stargate could only be in a binary system
and since that concept doesn't appear to exist in New Eden astrography,
it caused a bit of a headache for us lore nerds). There's more maths and
technobabble involved in the article linked to in this paragraph for the
people interested as well as *Eve: Source*, but suffice it to say that
using a gate can be an uncomfortable experience since, even with modern
technology, you're still being stretched along a pretty steep
gravitational gradient.

Today, the technology of stargates have been miniaturized enough that
capital ships are able to create their own wormholes capable of carrying
themselves to nearby systems without the use of stargates, though the
use of a jump drive (this jump drive should NOT be confused with the
jump drive mentioned in the interstellar travelling article I've been
linking. That ‘jump drive' seems to be referring to what we now call the
warp drive). The general principle of the jump drive seems to be the
same as stargates, only now the use of cynosural beacons allows the
forming wormhole to easily latch onto something in the destination
system. Jump bridges work on a similar principle.

Warp Drive
----------

While on the notion of interstellar travel, I would be remiss if I
didn't mention the warp drive. Formally known as the Sotiyo-Urbaata
drive for the two Caldari scientists that developed it, warp drives are
the things that allow us to zoom around the solar system at multiple
astronomical units per second (as a reference guide, it takes light
approximately 8 minutes to travel 1 astronomical unit, so traveling at
the standard 3 AU per second is quite speedy indeed, and roughly on par
with Star Trek's warp 9). First developed in the year 22821, [the
drive](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/scientific-articles/interstellar-traveling/)
was built to solve the problem of how to quickly travel between Caldari
Prime and Gallente Prime. Even though developed over 600 years ago, the
Amarr and Minmatar took a while to catch on (the Minmatar had
independently developed acceleration gates for their intra-system travel
needs, the Amarr apparently just enjoy a slow and plodding place).

The warp drive works through the magic of "depleted vacuum." Even empty
space generally has SOMETHING in it, be it atoms here or there, energy,
or even just random particles that pop into existence only to be
annihilated mere moments later. So even the vacuum of space is never
truly "empty." The warp drive works to create full, "depleted" vacuum,
so there is literally nothing in it. No specks of dust, no [virtual
particles](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_particle), no energy or
matter of any kind. Such an empty place, according to the game lore, has
special properties. Rather than being affected by friction, it actually
has anti-friction: things (including light) actually move faster in this
kind of space, rather than slower. By creating a depleted vacuum and
expanding the field to cover the entire ship, the ship then slips into
faster than light speeds as it tunnels through space. Navigation at FTL
speeds isn't easy; the ship can only detect gravitational sources at
warp speeds.

When the drive is activated, it locks onto a sufficiently massive object
(even stations can do) that acts as a beacon, so the drive knows when to
cut out. The need to lock onto a gravity source to activate the drive is
the nominal reason why you can't just pick a random direction and warp
off, but doesn't quite explain how we can just warp to bookmarks in the
middle of nowhere (but WHATEVER). Furthermore, you can blame your warp
core (essentially, a reactor (each race has their own kind) coupled with
the depleted vacuum generator) for creating "four dimensional drag" that
pulls your ship to a halt (this is ostensibly why we play submarines in
space (from a physics model perspective), as opposed to the Newtonian
motion that we would see in real life).

Valkyrie Tech
-------------

The upcoming release of Valkyrie is sure to be introducing some new
technology to the Eve universe. This is mostly a placeholder to 1)
remind me to look into Valkyrie tech/lore, and 2) let you know that I
know I'm lazy but at least that I INTEND to update this section when I
get a better grasp.

Vitoc
-----

It's hard to control slaves. They tend to not enjoy the experience. It
was a lot easier to control slaves before they learned to read (since
reading allows radical ideas like "hey, let's not be slaves anymore" to
be easily transmitted throughout a slave community), but in order for
most slaves to be useful in this day and age, the ability to read and
write is basically required. So as time went on, the Amarr had to
develop more advanced techniques to control their slaves. One of the
more devilish techniques they developed was the use of vitoxin and its
antidote, vitoc.

The methods have varied over the years, but the underlying concept is
the same: inject the slave with a
[toxin](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/vitoc/) that
will kill the slave (in, of course, the most gruesome and painful way
possible) unless an antidote is injected every day or two. That antidote
is vitoc. To make matters worse, vitoc was also created to be extremely
addicting, producing intense states of euphoria after it is injected.
Thus, even if there were a way to remove the toxin from the slave,
they'd still find themselves intensely addicted to the substance. In the
modern era, the Amarr have swapped to using a virus that ultimately
produces the deadly vitoxin. The Amarr use this to control their slaves,
threatening to withhold the vitoc if they do not follow orders.

Various attempts have been made to fight vitoxin and vitoc addiction
over the years. One of the most promising cures, Insorum, was developed
by Ishukone. Otro Gariushi, Ishukone's former CEO, gave the antidote's
formula to the Minmatar free of charge (apparently enraging the
mysterious Broker in the process, who had been bidding on it), and it is
now part of the standard treatment regimen. However, research into other
cures, both scientific and holistic, continues. One of the primary
centers for vitoc research can be found in Yrmori, at the [Forlorn
Hope](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2011/12/10/forlorn-hope/) institute
(which is admittedly not the first name I would have picked for an
optimistic "yes, we can beat this thing" research institute), though a
full cure for the toxin and addiction have yet to present themselves.

Miscellaneous
=============

There's just a few things left that I want to touch on, and then I
PROMISE I'll stop writing. These are things that either seemed to fit
either everywhere, or nowhere at all, so I figured it would just be
easiest to separate them out into their own little category.

Caroline's Star and Thera
-------------------------

More than any other singular event, the appearance of Caroline's Star
marked the renaissance in Eve lore (which, while I love it, I really,
really wish that they hadn't started this as I was driving down I-55 to
get home for Thanksgiving; checking twitter while driving is hazardous
to your health, everyone). Anyway, in November of YC 116, a spatial
anomaly became visible after being [first
noticed](https://twitter.com/NewEdenCaroline/status/537676000906457089)
by capsuleer and noted space photographer (and notorious butt-slapper)
Caroline Grace. The anomaly quickly became visible throughout the
Cluster which, if you know anything about how [light
works](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Light), shouldn't be possible
simultaneously across over 100 light-years. With backing from CCP, the
anomaly was colloquially became known as [Caroline's
Star](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2014/11/28/carolines-star/),
though its technical name if you want to get fancy (or boring) is
[Superluminal Stellar Anomaly
YC116-11-26](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/concord-inner-circle-statement-on-carolines-star-and-the-thera-system/).

With the anomaly [growing bigger and brighter by the
day](http://i.imgur.com/5TNTKMf.gif), some quick-working members of the
lore community managed to triangulate the position of Caroline's Star.
Startlingly, the anomaly seemed focused on a Jove system with the rather
boring name of W477-P. It was shortly after the appearance of Caroline's
Star that [unidentified
structures](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2014/12/14/unidentified-structure/),
eventually identified as [Jove
observatories](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2015/03/22/unidentified-structures-uncloaked/),
began partially-decloaking throughout the Cluster. With the appearance
of these structures came the first appearance of the Circadian Seeker
Sleeper drones which I've previously discussed, and eventually the
Drifters, who have grown more and more hostile as time has progressed.
It was also around now that 101 new systems became accessible to
capsuleers through the wormhole network. All of these system are barren
wastelands, consisting of planetary systems in which each planet has
been shattered by a cataclysmic event (think the Seyllin incident but
only moreso). At the center, above a turbulent star, sits the enigmatic
[epicenters](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2015/01/24/epicenter/).

While the events surrounding Caroline's Star had been the subject of
[very](https://interstellarprivateer.wordpress.com/2014/12/18/phenomenal-cosmic-power/)
[heavy](https://interstellarprivateer.wordpress.com/2014/12/19/anatomy-of-a-catastrophe/)
[speculation](https://interstellarprivateer.wordpress.com/2014/12/19/evolution-of-theories/)
in the lore community, the
[Ever-Chronicle](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/inheritance/)
(hallowed be its name) shed light on what actually went down in W477-P,
even if we don't know the full story in-character. Long story short,
blame the Talocan (I suspect this phrase may become more and more
prevalent in this guide as time and the storyline go on). You see, the
Talocan were all fancy schmancy, but being THAT level of fancy schmancy
requires a lot of energy. One of the best places to get a lot of energy
is that big pile of nuclear fusion in the sky. So the Talocan built a
giant solar panel around W477-P; a concept that's been long theorized
and what we call a [Dyson
Sphere](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dyson_sphere) in the real world.
To be more specific, the Talocan apparently constructed a variation on
the sphere called a Dyson swarm; rather than building a solid sphere
around W477-P, they built a lattice of interconnected solar arrays.
Saves a bit on material costs (though when you're building something
around an entire friggin' star, I'm not sure how much material costs
even matter). From this lattice, they powered most of their wormhole
connections and various other doodads, and transmitted that energy
throughout the present-day cluster.

After the Talocan moved on to wherever it is they moved on to (my
headcanon says they became the Q but that's just me), they left most of
their energy infrastructure intact. The Sleepers, as they ran from the
ruins of the Second Empire, stumbled upon the energy lattice and managed
to figure out how to hook up some of their own devices to it (notably,
the cloaking devices of the various Sleeper caches found in New Eden),
which they used to flee into Anoikis. After the Sleepers left, the REST
of the Jove stumbled upon it, and quickly realized exactly what they
were dealing with. The Jove hooked up their own devices (notably, the
cloaking devices of the observatories spread throughout the Cluster).

Thankfully, before the cycle could repeat again W477-P exploded.

This is perhaps the oddest portion of the whole affair. Even 10,000
years ago, it would have been clear that W477-P, as a red supergiant,
was fairly close to going supernova. So why the Talocan chose to build
one of their primary energy generators around that star is a bit of a
mystery, and one that remains unresolved to this day.

Anyway, the Jove realized what was going to happen, and figured it was
going to happen in the next 1500 years or so after discovery. What the
Jove didn't anticipate (and frankly, couldn't have anticipated) was the
Seyllin Incident, which I discuss below because putting this section in
alphabetical order seemed like a smart idea at one point. But to make a
long story short (I know, I know, THAT particular train left the station
somewhere around page 4), the Seyllin explosion, through the various
wormhole connections that already existed around W477-P before it went
off, funneled a LOT of mass and energy into W477-P, and an already
nauseous red supergiant didn't react well to a lot more food going into
its stomach. I'll end the metaphor here but you can guess how it ends.

So W477-P goes supernova and the Jove have a VERY bad day. W477-P is
pretty close to Jove space. More importantly, stargates existed in
W477-P, and the energy released by the supernova was able to use the
gate network to spider out from W477-P, leading to the collapse of
almost the entire Jove stargate network (there's a bit of retconning
going on here, as I don't think the W477-P network every formally
connected with the Jove regions next door, but we're just gonna run with
it). Given that there were only a few hundred, maybe 1,000 Jove left at
the time, however, they probably cared a bit less than other races might
have (especially since they have their own wormhole generators derived
from Talocan technology). And because of the fancy schmancy
energy-transmission tech that the Talocan set up, we were able to see
the explosion across the Cluster in real time. Another result of the
explosion is that the energy that poured into the wormhole network
through the devices connected to the Dyson swarm shook loose a few more
Talocan-settled systems and connected them to the standard wormhole
network; these are the so-called shattered systems found in Anoikis as
well as Thera.

Speaking of Thera, we didn't get many answers about that place. CCP has
assured us that Thera is an important part of the storyline, but it
looks, at least in terms of what went down with Caroline's Star, like
the damage we see in the shattered systems and Thera were merely
collateral damage from the supernova.

We still have a few unanswered questions about all of this. We still
don't know how or why the Sisters of Eve got to Thera before it joined
the Anoikis wormhole network (not to mention the Sansha getting in
elsewhere), or why Thera [has more wormholes](http://www.eve-scout.com/)
than the normal system. We also don't know what they found that
warranted the Sisters building 8 different stations to study what they
found there. And while we can assume that the [Thukker
caravan](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2015/05/09/expedition-office/)
that somehow made it to Thera got there during the Seyllin incident, we
don't know how they fit into the Thera storyline.

What we DO know, however, is that
[Rhavas](https://interstellarprivateer.wordpress.com/2014/12/18/phenomenal-cosmic-power/)
[is](https://interstellarprivateer.wordpress.com/2014/12/19/anatomy-of-a-catastrophe/)
[a](https://interstellarprivateer.wordpress.com/2014/12/19/evolution-of-theories/)
[dang](https://interstellarprivateer.wordpress.com/2016/01/02/the-revelations-of-delegate-zero/)
[genius](https://interstellarprivateer.wordpress.com/2016/01/15/carolines-star-4-kardashevs-children/).

Calendar
--------

I realize that I swap a lot between saying years in the traditional AD
system and in the newer YC system, but I'm working off of what the
timeline gives me. It's easier to keep it set that way rather than
referring to YC -18,000, which just seems silly to me. In any case, I
just wanted to make a brief note on the timekeeping system used in New
Eden.
[YC](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/time-the-astrologer/)
refers to the Yoiul Convention, a timekeeping system established aboard
the Jove ship *Yoiul* in 23236 AD. The new calendar, which is used to
transact all space-based business, was established to simplify things
when time is of the essence (since each empire had developed their own
calendars based on each planet's own length of year and length of day).
Through complete accident (I'm sure), one of the few things Amarr
scripture preserved from the very early days of settlement just happened
to be our classic Gregorian calendar, down to what day corresponds to
January 1, leap years, and when midnight happens. Those crazy Amarr.

When the time came to negotiate a universal time system, there were a
[number
of](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/time-the-astrologer/)
[factions](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/time-the-astrologer/)
advocating different calendars. Some wanted a completely physics-based
calendar, based on some celestial source. Others wanted to set the clock
to the human body's natural 25 hour clock. And the last set, known as
the traditionalists, wanted to align New Eden's calendar with the
ancient timekeeping systems that researchers reconstructed. Obviously,
the traditionalists won out in the end, and YC 0 was celebrated
throughout New Eden on January 1, 23236 AD. We continue to use the
system to this day. As noted in the introduction, the real life year of
2016 corresponds to the in-game year of YC 118.

Naming Conventions / Languages
------------------------------

One of the things I wanted to touch on was how to set up appropriate
names for the bloodlines. Most of the bloodlines developed on completely
separate worlds, and as such, they developed their own languages through
the Dark Ages, and they continue to use those languages today. Of
course, from an in-game perspective, the use of different languages
doesn't matter thanks to the development of [translation
software](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/language-translators/)
in our ships (though why local remains untranslated remains an open
question). Regardless, crafting appropriate sounding names is an
important aspect to most RPers, so I've included a brief review of most
in-game languages and names. I should mention that most of this research
was done by Seismic Stan in the course of preparing his excellent
in-character (though now, sadly, defunct) website at Tech4 News, which
is dedicated to covering news from a non-capsuleer perspective, though
there are [other excellent player-researched
sources](https://forums.eveonline.com/default.aspx?g=posts&m=184211#post184211)
out there.

Before I dig into these, I want to again mention that these should only
be seen as very general guidelines. In modern day New Eden, cultures are
mixing like never before, meaning that there is no particular reason why
a Gallente couldn't have an Amarr sounding name, or vice versa. And, of
course, given that our own planet has developed hundreds of languages
over the course of human existence, these rules are by no means the only
ways to create names.

**Amarr:** Little is known about the native Amarr language, and what
little we do know can seem at times contradictory (though that hasn't
stopped some intrepid players from attempting to put together a [more
comprehensive
language](http://backstage.eve-inspiracy.com/index.php?topic=1078.0)).
Still, it appears that True Amarr names often have a Persian or even
Farsi feel to them (somewhat oddly, given their Catholic origins), while
Khanid seems to have a more Mongolian background to it.

I unfortunately wasn't able to find any information on the Ni-Kunni.

**Minmatar:** Given the tribal background of the Minmatar, it should be
unsurprising that language probably varies from tribe to tribe, though
since they all developed on the same world (originally), there's
probably also a unified Matari language. That being said, there's still
some patterns apparent in the various tribal names. The Brutors tend to
have a Maori feel to them, while the Sebiestior (somewhat randomly) seem
to be derived from Nordic names. The Vherokior seem to derive from Urdu
names.

**Gallente:** As might be expected, the Gallente language and names seem
to derive mostly from French roots, with perhaps a Gallic influence to
them. The Jin-Mei, meanwhile, seem to have Chinese-derived names. The
Intaki language, derived from Indian origins (though with obvious French
influences), is a bit special. The language has been surprisingly
well-developed by RP groups, to the extent that
[entire](http://www.ilfcorp.com/index.php/language-vaanin-kintaki-lexicon)
[pages](http://www.ilfcorp.com/index.php/language-vaanin-kintaki) have
been dedicated to the language. To my knowledge, no other in-game
language has been developed to such an extent, but if that's incorrect,
please feel free to let me know.

**Caldari:** We've only seen snippets of the Caldari language in the
Prime Fiction (helpfully aggregated
[here](http://fourthdistrict.net/forums/viewtopic.php?t=1172)). What
little we've seen suggests a combination of Finnish and Japanese
influences, however.

The Other
---------

We should probably come up with a more inventive (or at least
metaphorically less-transparent) name than the Other, but I guess
"hyper-intelligent AI that has no tether to or understanding of the
human condition and therefore is antithetical to humanity" doesn't
exactly roll off the tongue as easily. To explain what the Other is, a
short recap of the Sleepers history might be helpful. In summary, the
Sleepers live in the Matrix (they call it a construct, but whatever),
where they have a few rules. The main one for our purposes is that no
Sleeper shall exist in the Matrix without having a body in the real
world to return to. The Other developed within the Matrix as a fully
independent artificial intelligence that threw off the strictures of
one-mind-one-body long ago. And because the Other wasn't really born of
human (or Sleeper) parents, it has no reference to things like human
emotions or drivers. Instead, it seems rather, uhh, genocide-y (think
evil machines from the *Matrix* instead of good machines from the
*Culture* series).

Indeed, much of [Der
Überchronicle](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/inheritance/)
is spent hyping up the danger of the Other (whether there is just one
Other running around causing a muck or there are multiple of them is
unknown and probably beside the point for our purposes). We're told that
"the artificial sapient [because calling it 'the Other' outright is a
bit too easy I guess] is almost certainly a high level entity capable of
multiple simultaneous intrusions", meaning that it's capable of
possessing multiple people (as it did with Empress Jamyl)
simultaneously. We're further exposited to note that the Other "'is a
severe existential threat. Its sentience quotient must be at least 15
positive.' 'Several points more I should think,' interrupted Veniel."
[Rhavas](https://interstellarprivateer.wordpress.com/2016/01/02/the-revelations-of-delegate-zero/)
was kind enough to link to the [sentience
scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sentience_quotient) mentioned here,
while noting that humans end up around a 13. So the Other is not only
possessing people, but is super smart too. Ladies and gentlemen, we've
found our new Big Bad.

The Other's ultimate ends are unclear at this moment, though it is
rather dryly noted that its interests are almost certainly "inimical to
the interests ... of the New Eden cluster". We know that he was directly
responsible for the harvesting of the Sleeper implants that led to the
development of the DUST soldiers. We also learn that Jamyl was better
than we thought about all of this. Rather than fighting or directly
opposing the Other as it battled her mind, [she eventually accepted the
Other's
presence](https://web.archive.org/web/20160227223209/https:/wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/And_I_Shall_Hide_-_Alternate_(Chronicle))
and worked with it; seeking to disrupt it's plans from within, so to
speak, rather than outrightly opposing it. Indeed, it's heavily
suggested that the lead up to her assassination was nudged into action
by the Real Jamyl, knowing what the end result was likely to be. I have
to admit, that's a class move by her if it's true.

But it's not all doom and gloom, at least. Both the remnant Jove and the
Society of Conscious Thought are not only aware of the Other's presence,
but actively scheming against it. And, apparently, we have at least SOME
method to detect its presence in someone (as demonstrated by the
Society's scan of Jamyl shortly before her demise), though it's not too
difficult to imagine how this leads to a witch hunt of sorts across the
Cluster as we try to find out where else the Other has its hands (AI
appendages? Manipulators?), so to speak. Additionally, although the
Other has a basic grasp of government, it doesn't really understand what
motivates much of humanity. It's noted that "it is probable that the
entity views the religious mode of thought through the prism of power
and politics alone", suggesting that the Other doesn't understand WHY
religion is such a powerful force (at least in one corner of the
Cluster). So it's rather easy to see how this could turn into one of
those "it's our very humanity that shall be our own deliverance" deals
that pop up every now and then. Anyway, long story short,

MACHINES ARE BAD EVERYONE.

Seyllin Incident/Isogen-5
-------------------------

There's one last topic to discuss before concluding. It used to be kind
of set off on its own, but given the developments surrounding wormhole
space, it's not as isolated a topic as it used to be. I'm talking, of
course, about wormholes and the fateful day that they first opened to us
citizens of New Eden.

March 10, YC 111 started as an ordinary day, but it certainly didn't end
like one. Before the day was out, 10 separate Class-O stars across the
Cluster simultaneously suffered what astronomers have rather boringly
termed "[main sequence
events](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q62Wk3xWH8g)." In reality, these
"events" were massive explosions, creating coronal mass ejections that
were powerful enough to destroy the first planets in these systems. The
broken husks of these [shattered
planets](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2010/04/05/shattered-planets/)
can be seen even today in these various systems (Rhavas has done an
excellent and in-depth study of all known shattered planets in his
[Shattered Planet
Datacore](http://interstellarprivateer.wordpress.com/shattered-planets-datacore/)).
Of course, anything merely man-made had little chance of surviving
events that could destroy planets. While a number of systems were
thankfully uninhabited, we do know that an [ORE survey
team](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/report-communications-lost-with-ore-survey-team-in-outer-ring/)
was destroyed, while a [Thukker
caravan](http://community.eveonline.com/news/news-channels/world-news/report-thukker-caravan-reported-missing-in-great-wildlands/)
should have been but instead was later [found in
Thera](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/2015/05/09/expedition-office/).
Exactly how it arrived there intact is still unknown.

These losses pale in comparison, though, to the loss of life in Seyllin.
Seyllin was a small but successful Federation mining colony housing
roughly 500 million people on it. Troubles first arose when the local
solar monitoring satellites dropped out of contact, followed by the
colony itself a few minutes later. This was due to the massive
electromagnetic pulse that essentially flash-fried any inhabitants on
the sunward side of Seyllin I. However, a significant number of citizens
were on the dark side of the planet, protected from the pulse by the
planet's sheer bulk. It took a while for both the Federation and others
[to figure out precisely what was going
on](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/world-on-fire/),
wasting precious moments that could have been used to evacuate citizens
from the doomed planet. Finally, the Federation Navy, assisted by the
Sisters of EVE and other factions (including, notably, the Serpentis),
managed to begin lifting some citizens, but not nearly enough. Only
843,000 out of a population of 500 million were ultimately saved from
Seyllin I.

Governments and scientists alike were, naturally, eager to determine
just what caused these "events." Eventually, the signature of a rare
substance known as Isogen-5 was found at the site of each explosion.
Isogen-5, a rare isotope of the somewhat more common Isogen, is an
extremely unstable substance (if that wasn't obvious from the, you know,
massive explosions it caused). We're not entirely sure who or what
placed the Isogen-5 near the stars, but
[there's](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-spiral/)
[at](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/half-a-life/)
[least](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/one/)
[one](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/the-great-harvest/)
[proven](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/we-humans/)
[case](http://community.eveonline.com/backstory/chronicles/world-on-fire/)
(though not one that's known publicly, to my knowledge) where rogue
drones were hoarding the substance, apparently under the command of
Empress Jamyl (who had yet to make her return to Cluster politics
following her apparent death), to power the Terran superweapon that she
used to devastating effect in the [Battle of
Mekhios](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2009/12/23/40/) against the
Elder Fleet. Prior to her return, she tested her superweapon once on a
[Blood Raider
fleet](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/2011/02/12/t-ipzb-graveyard/),
with a similar result. Why the drones were following her command, when
other rogue drones have shown little proclivity for working with organic
beings, is a mystery. There is at least some evidence that the March 10
detonations were, in fact, an accident. Under this theory, one of the
Isogen-5 caches made by the drones under Jamyl's command accidentally
detonated, which set off a chain reaction amongst the other Isogen-5
caches. However, that theory doesn't quite explain why some shattered
planets are found in wormhole space (where New Eden rogue drones
couldn't possibly have traveled to before the wormholes opened), so the
question of who created the caches there in the first place is still
very much up for debate.

In any event, the Isogen-5 detonations did more than just kill a few
hundred million people. The explosions were so severe that they ripped
holes in the fabric of space-time (and dumped a heck of a lot of matter
in to W477-P, leading to its early demise). Apparently random wormholes
soon appeared throughout the cluster. Intriguingly, out of the trillions
upon trillions of stars in the universe that the wormholes could lead
to, they all lead to about 2,600 that are inhabited in some capacity by
the Sleepers (the reasons for why wormholes only lead to these select
systems is unknown). These systems, which collectively make up Anoikis
(which, as you may remember from above, is the equivalent of w-space),
are located in an unknown area of space (though *Templar One* does
mention that the only identifiable objects in Anoikis are quasars, which
would make Anoikis incredibly distant from New Eden). However, within
hours of the first wormhole opening in
[Vitrauze](http://wiki.eveonline.com/en/wiki/The_Vitrauze_Project_(Chronicle)),
the Gallente were sending ships through. Soon, the empires and CONCORD
all agreed to buy certain items taken from Sleeper salvage at a
standardized rate. Sleeper salvage led to a number of technological
advances, including Tech 3 strategic cruisers and the technology needed
to create the immortal soldiers in Dust 514. Needless to say, research
on Isogen-5, Anoikis, and related areas is still ongoing (including a
[project](https://evetravel.wordpress.com/project-compass-spectrographs/)
by yours truly!). How all these pieces truly fit together may never
entirely be known, unfortunately.

Conclusion
==========

Well, that about wraps it up. I confess that after writing all of this,
I'm ironically not entirely sure of the best way to conclude. Some
grandiose statement on the interconnectedness and depth of New Eden's
story seems appropriate, but it turns out that Seismic Stan already said
everything I could on the subject and more in his excellent foreword.
But one of the things this project has taught me is that the best way to
learn the lore is to really dig into it yourself. I took pains while
writing this to cross-reference to the bigger articles on the lore, but
there's still so much out there that I just didn't have time or room to
talk about. Dig into it, and you can see the kind of story CCP has built
for Eve. At the risk of sounding cliché, there's a universe worth of
stories out there to discover.

I will say that EVE has a fantastic backstory though, and the best part
is that it's still being written. Whether it be the political intrigues
of New Eden's null security alliances, discovering more about our past
history, or the next scandal or crisis to hit the empires, the story of
EVE lives and grows every day. It's one of many great things about a
great game, and I had a blast putting this guide together and digging
back into the lore.

I'd like to thank Seismic Stan for letting me take over his blog for a
few days to post the original version, as well as instigating this guide
in the first place. He acted as a constant sounding board whenever I
needed it in the early days (much to the detriment to his sleeping
schedule), and his suggestions and editing proved invaluable. And all of
that says nothing of the promotional help he gave or how he dealt with
me making hundreds of updates to the Guide. I can't possibly thank him
enough. And I must thank Morwen Lagann for acting as my second set of
lore-familiar eyes on this, making sure I didn't commit some grievous RP
faux pas, as well as Rhavas for the fantastic work he does on his blog
collating info so I don't have to, as well as proofing the guide on
almost every iteration. I'd also like to thank the EVE Content Teams,
past and present, that really made this possible. Without dedicated lore
people such as CCP TonyG, Abraxus, Dropbear, Falcon, Affinity, Delegate
Zero and the others on the Lore team over the years, this kind of
project never would have been possible (nor, for that matter, would a
13,000 entry wiki). This Guide was as much a way to showcase their
painstaking work on this as it was to summarize it, and I can't give
them enough credit for the fantastic universe that they've created.

If you guys have any questions or comments, don't hesitate to contact me
in game or out of game. My [contact
info](https://gate.eveonline.com/Mail/Compose/Mark726) can be found on
my [website](http://evetravel.wordpress.com/), and I check
[twitter](http://www.twitter.com/webspaceships) constantly (no
seriously, I have a serious twitter addiction problem. Send help).
Thanks again, and I hope it you had as much fun reading it as I did
writing it!
